Dying Azur: The Death of Blue in Ms. Fr. 640

Sheena McKeever

Fall 2024

GU4962: Making and Knowing in Early Modern Europe

“Death,” “dying,” and “killing” are recurrent descriptions of craft
processes in early modern manuscripts.[^1] These terms fit within a
broader common lexicon on colors in terms of “body,” “movement,” and
“transformation.” In Ms. Fr. 640, *azur*—a non-specific pigment notable
for its vibrant blue—is one pigment described in personified terms of
life and death.[^2] Despite its ubiquity, the meaning of a pigment’s
“death” is seldom if ever clarified in these treatises. This essay
explores the shared cultural vocabularies and practices regarding the
“death” of colors in early modern Europe. Through the reconstruction of
period terms and conduct of artisanal experiments, this study questions
what visual cues correlated with a color “dying”?[^3] And how did those
observations of color “death” compare to the description of color
“death” in artisanal manuscripts?

I offer a preliminary reconstruction of the early modern term “death” as
related to color in both theory and practice. The first half of this
essay focuses on the literary contexts in which “death” of azur appears,
both within Ms. Fr. 640 and broader European treatises. The second half
is dedicated to reporting the results from experiments on the “death” of
azur, including the unpublished observations from the Making and Knowing
Project’s 2018 experiment on grinding azur, as conducted by Pamela
Smith, Tianna Uchacz, Tillman Taape, and Sophie Pitman. Finally, I
report the data yielded by my own re-creation and adaptation of the 2018
experiment, which extends research on the “death” of sixteenth-century
pigments in the Making and Knowing Project’s Critical Edition, *Secrets
of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France*. Jo Kirby and Marika Spring
introduced the “death” of pigments as an “undesirable change,” noting
also the issue of azur’s confusing identity.[^4] Marika Spring
determined that *azur d'esmail* in Ms. Fr. 640 referred to smalt (ground
glass colored with cobalt), while *azur* might also have referred to
smalt, rather than azurite.[^5] Other essays in the Making and Knowing
Project’s Critical Edition, *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance
France* have understood the pigment *azur* in Ms. Fr. 640 as azurite,
lapis lazuli, smalt, and/or verditer.[^6] The Making and Knowing
Project’s research has also focused on the liveliness of color for
pictorial subjects, such as the effects of “flesh color,” as well as how
the term “body” used to describe pigments was ambiguous and applied to
several different media.[^7] This study aims to encourage more thorough
investigations of the rhetoric of colors in late Medieval and early
modern Europe.[^8]

Engaging with hands-on embodied knowledge presents a variety of
challenges for historians of material culture. By contrasting literary
excerpts with pre-existing data and first-hand observations from
experimentation, this research interrogates the authenticity of
reconstruction and the level of certainty that experiments can reveal
about knowledge of the past. Where does the knowledge of early modern
craft lie in modern reconstruction? Conducting an azur-grinding
experiment based on Ms. Fr. 640’s text raises interesting questions
about how we interpret texts which are trying to convey a type of
knowledge about *doing* something. By what means can we measure the
success or failure of a recreation that attempts to reconstruct textual
accounts? What kinds of obstacles might stand in our way as we try to
understand these sources? The reconstruction of pigment grinding
experiments reveals the discrepancies between the nature of azur’s
“death” in literary and material contexts. While modern scholarship
tends to prioritize textual sources as a way to make sense of visual and
material evidence, by contrast, this research considers to what extent
experimental results can guide an understanding about textual accounts
of azur’s “death” and the broader network of craft knowledge on the
nature of blue.

***Segreti per Colori*: An Early History of Azur’s Color Loss**

Decades prior to Ms. Fr. 640’s creation, artisanal manuscripts in Europe
were already equipped with language that described azure’s color change.
The “Secrets for Colors” \[Ita. *Segreti per Colori*\] is a
mid-fifteenth century manuscript written in latinized Italian and
preserved in Bologna.[^9] Its anonymous author began with a chapter “On
preparing various kinds of natural azures,” which provided the reader
with a “test” \[Ita. *la* *sperientia*\] to evaluate the quality and
nature of lapis lazuli.[^10] The author instructed the reader to place
the stone into fire and then assess its quality based on the observable
change as it cooled: “If the stone retains its colour \[Ita. *sta in suo
colore*\] and does not become pale \[Ita. *non smortisca*\], it is good.
But if it both improves and retains \[Ita. *migliorasse, mantenga*\] its
colour, it is both good and perfect.”[^11] The status and monetary value
of the lapis stone was contingent on its ability to retain its deep blue
hue. The desire for lapis to preserve and even improve its blue color is
echoed in later treatises as a quality of liveliness. In the same
passage, the inverse is described, wherein the lapis stone’s loss of
color was an indication of a lesser and unusable quality:

> If it happens that the stone loses all its colour \[Ita. *perdesse
> tutto el colore*\], …it is not ultramarine and is not fine, and
> consequently you cannot procure ultramarine azure from it.[^12]

First, the explicit reference to azure as ultramarine indicates that
there are different material blues. The author-practitioner warned that
the stone which lost color contained little substance and was not
worthwhile investing time nor money into it as an artistic material. In
these passages, Italian words *sta*, *migliorasse*, and *mantenga*
characterize azure that retains its color. The verb *Stare* is defined
as “stand,” “stay,” or “endure”; *Migliorare* as “improve,” “better”;
and *Mantenere* as “maintain,” “sustain.”[^13] Azure’s color loss is
characterized by the Italian words *non* *smortisca* and *perdesse*,
which correlate to *Smorto,* defined as “pale” or “deadly,” and
*Perdere* as “lose.”[^14] The binary terms of “lose” and “remain” only
hint to the vocabulary of “death” and “life” made more explicit in Ms.
Fr. 640. Nonetheless, the described preservation and loss characterized
a similar positive and negative relationship to life and death.

While the first chapter of *Segreti per Colori* diagnosed azure’s color
loss as negative, it also introduced an exception to this rule, where an
instance of color loss could have indicated high quality stones:

> As for those stones which change \[Ita. *mutano*\] the beauty of their
> primitive colour, we must consider how many degrees \[Ita. *in quanti
> gradi*\] they have changed \[Ita. *mutano*\], because there are some
> stones which the more they lose \[Ita. *piu* \<gap\>*montano*\] the
> finer they are.[^15]

Notable is the author’s mention about evaluating the “degrees” to which
the stone changed color.[^16] The loss and preservation of color was
described as a cumulative process, where gradation could be visually
observed and measured to some extent. The following sentence indicated
that the author supposed that color loss could be due to “the quantity
of earthy matter” \[Ita. *La quantita de la terra*\] contained in the
stone, referencing the inclusions that would have been necessary to
remove.[^17] While the author did not elaborate further on the
calculation of the degrees nor the beneficial loss of colour, they did
seem to suggest that the evaluation of whether the “loss” of a stone’s
color was positive or negative was dependent on the ratio between
“earthy matter” and azure. The retention, loss, and change of color
described in this chapter reinforced the author’s prescription that
observation of blue was necessary prior to its preparation for use.
While the author did not describe the visual differences of azure’s
color change, nor why these changes occurred, they did reinforce that
training the eyes was a crucial skill for evaluating the quality, value,
and usability of azure.

**“Dying” and “Killing” Colors in Seventeenth-Century Manuscripts**

In the seventeenth century, the language of “death” and “killing” became
more pervasive in artisanal manuscripts, including Belgian painter
Pierre Lebruns’ “Collection of Essays on the Wonders of Painting” \[Fr.
*Recueil des essaies des merveilles de la peinture*, 1635\], French
painter Roger de Piles’s “The First Elements of Practical Painting”
\[Fr. *Les premiere élémens de peinture pratique*, 1684\], and French
physician Sir Théodore** **Turquet de Mayerne’s “Mayerne Manuscript”
\[Lat. *Pictoria Sculptoria & qua subalternarum artium*, 1620\].[^18]
Each author described various pigments and colors in terms of dying and
killing.

First, the authors used the language of death to characterize the
appearances of colors on canvas. In Lebrun’s manuscript’s section “Many
Painting Secrets” \[Fr. *Plusieurs Secrets de Peinture*\], he related a
color dying to its application on the canvas: “The colour of the primed
canvas is called ‘*couleur* *mate*,’ that is to say, ‘dead,’ \[Fr.
*mort*\] on account of the fat oil.”[^19] The description of death was
indebted to the appearance of sheen on the canvas, rather than as part
of its preparation. In de Piles’s manuscript, he also described the
impact of artisanal process to the death of color:

> There are painters who prefer canvases that have only one layer who
> prefer them to those which have two, because they make the colors die
> less \[Fr. *moins mourir*\] and they roll more easily when one wants
> to transport them.[^20]

A double-layer application of paint thickened the color and reduced its
“death,” which could have referred to the thinness of its appearance or
quick fading. The Mayerne Manuscript also adopted the language of death
to describe the reaction of individual materials, such that “esmail dies
\[Fr. *meurt*\] easily” and “Cyanus blue is worthless and dies \[Fr.
*meurt*\] uncontrolled.”[^21] In addition, Mayerne understood that
enamel pigments were especially prone to “dying”:

> The death of colors is when the oil swimming above dries up and forms
> a skin, which blackens in the air. There are some colors, and the
> other enamels which do not mix easily with the oil, but always go deep
> without binding, and thus die \[Fr. *meurent*\] easily \[&?\]
> blacken.[^22]

Here, Mayerne attributed the death of pigments not only to the
individual pigments, but their temperament when prepared with various
media. He also described that the durability of blue pigments was
contingent on painterly techniques, such that “The Blue can be laid down
with tempera with glue on your oil primer then when dry apply a good
subtle varnish & strong drying. Thus you blue never dies \[Fr. *ne meurt
jamais*\].”[^23] The Mayerne manuscript continued with specified
instructions on avoiding death of azur, including “When working with
Blue, if you add a little Aspic oil to the ash of Azure, the color does
not die \[Fr. *ne* *meurt pas*\].”[^24]

Next, Lebrun and de Piles both called upon the vocabulary of “killing”
\[Fr. *fait mourir*\], derived from “death” \[Fr. *mourir*\] to
characterize specific pigments and binders. In *Recueil des essaies*,
Lebrun described the green pigment verdigris as having the capacity to
“kill”: “Verdigris…is used only with the shadows, for it is a poison in
painting, and kills \[Fr. *fait mourir*\] all the colours with which it
is mixed.”[^25] Lebrun noted verdigris’ inherent properties as capable
of “killing,” which he described as an action rather than a visual
result. De Piles described the pigment-binder turpentine oil as a source
of killing, “These paintings appear in the future only as a colored fog
and without any vivacity because the excessive quantity of oil, mainly
that of turpentine, absorbs and kills \[Fr. *fait mourir*\] the
colors.”[^26] In terms of verdigris, while de Piles did not describe the
pigment as “killing,” he did describe the pigment’s negative qualities
at length:

> Verdigris is the plague \[Fr. *la peste*\] of all colours, and is
> capable of ruining \[Fr. *perdre*\] a whole painting if the least part
> of it were to enter into the printing of a canvas…Sometimes it is
> calcined to remove its malignancy \[Fra. *malignite*\] and make it
> more durable, but it is as dangerous \[Fr. *dangereux*\] to calcine as
> stonecrop; and however purified it may be, it should only be used
> alone, for it would spoil \[Fr. *gâterois*\] the colours with which it
> could be mixed.[^27]

His descriptions of verdigris were reminiscent of the lexicon of “death”
and “killing,” as he described the pigment as “plague” and “dangerous”
\[Fr. *la peste*; *dangereux*\] with qualities of “malignancy” \[Fr.
*malignite*\] that was capable of “ruin” and “spoil” \[Fr. *perdre*,
*gâterois*\].[^28]

Finally, Lebrun used the lexicon of “death” to describe the pictorial
effects of a painting: “At the present time, painters are obliged to
write under the figures ‘these are painted,’ lest the spectator should
fancy that they are dead \[Fr. *morts*\] figures glued to a
canvas.”[^29] Lebrun commented on the state of painting and its
imitative capacity, using the language of “death” to contrast the lively
appearances of figures to which painters aspired. This survey of early
modern artisanal manuscripts demonstrates that a lexicon of death was
used to describe the actions and identities of diverse colors.

**The Death of Azur in Ms. Fr. 640**

In Ms. Fr. 640, the “death” of azur was described both in terms of its
inherent properties, its lack of “body,” and the painter’s intervention
to prevent its death in pigment preparation. The author-practitioner
communicated the results apparently observed from his own painterly
experience, notably the *undesirable* results in preparing azur blue.
Through the written word, he attempted to preserve knowledge of azur’s
unpredictable material qualities.[^30] The preparation of paint involved
a pigment and binder being ground into a paste, which ideally had three
requirements: it handled well on the brush, it adhered to the painted
surface, and it remained stable over time. In several instances, the
manuscript highlighted azur’s temperamental nature when ground and
mulled. As documented in Ms. Fr. 640, the variable results yielded from
preparing azur suggested the repetitive experimentation with blue led by
numerous artisans.[^31] Azur’s reactions are described in several
contexts, including its variable reactions when mixed with oil and
water.[^32] The lexicon on color in Ms. Fr. 640 appears to have referred
to both material properties and the gestural movements the artist
conducted when dealing with them.

Under the heading “Azur,” the death of azur d’esmail (i.e., smalt) is
described: “*Azur d’esmail* hates more than any other to be ground,
especially with water, for it dies & loses all its color \[Fr. *se meurt
& perd toute sa couleur*\]” \[Fig. 1\].[^33] Azur d’esmail’s “death”
\[Fr. *meurt*\] was communicated as being akin to its “loss” \[Fr.
*perd*\] of color, though the qualification of the change is unclear,
whether it altered hues, darkened, or made some other change. The
author-practitioner continued with a suggestion for azur d’esmail’s
preparation that avoided undesirable change: “However, because it cannot
be worked if it is coarse, grind not with water but with oil & grind it
thickly, and in this way it will not die as much \[Fr. *il ne se mourra
pas tant*\].”[^34] The author evaluated oil as the suitable substance
with which azur should have been prepared as opposed to water. “Death”
\[Fr. *meurt, mourra*\] was characterized as a cumulative and inevitable
process for azur, similar to the description of “degrees” of azur’s
color change in *Segreti per Colori*. The early modern French verb
*Meutrir* was defined as “to bruise” though its earlier use was “to
kill,” and *Mourir* as “to cease to live.”[^35] While “death” was not
qualified nor its definition elaborated on in these passages, it
presumably referenced azur’s fading, darkening, or changing color
tone.[^36] The author-practitioner’s suggested strategy for mitigating
azur’s “death” was contingent upon their embodied knowledge about its
temperament towards and reaction with various substances.

Elsewhere in Ms. Fr. 640, particularly under the heading “Painting in
esmail d’azur in oil” \[Fol. 11r\], the author-practitioner agreed that
oil was the ideal medium to prepare azure pigment. The text described
that “Azure ash are only good for landscapes because they die \[Fr.
*meurent*\] in oil. Only true azure holds on \[Fr. *tienne*\].”[^37]
Azure’s ability to not “die” and “hold on” in oil indicated its
authenticity and high quality. Another excerpt under “Azur *d’esmail* in
oil” \[Fol. 61v\] attested that azur should have been ground with oil as
opposed to water: “And if you do not find any that is subtle enough, you
can grind it \[azure\] well, not with water but with oil, & grind it
thickly.”[^38] Despite the author’s preference that azur be mixed with
oil, they nonetheless warned those painting with azure that the
combination could also *cause* its death: “Also, azure ground with oil
always remains shiny, which is not a good sign for azure for this causes
it to die \[Fr. *mourir*\].”[^39] Here, azur’s death was associated not
only with color change but with other visual properties—like shininess,
the presence of too much fatty oil—as indicative of its demise.

Ms. Fr. 640’s commentary on azur’s death extended also to the measures
that the artist could and must have taken in its preparation to prevent
its death. As the entry on “Azur *d’esmail* in oil” continued, it
reported on the application technique its reader could have employed to
mitigate azur’s dying: “Azure wants to be layered neatly, which is why
it always dies somewhat when, to mend an old panel, one layers it on
old, already tarnished, azure.”[^40] Azur’s ability to resist death,
according to Ms. Fr. 640’s author-practitioner(s), was indebted to its
physical property (i.e., “body”) and the artist’s application: “But this
is the best, as long as you re-coat it twice, for in this manner, the
colors, having more body, do not die \[Fr. *ne meurent*\] & are all the
more beautiful for it, especially azure, lake, & those do not have
body.”[^41] Here, the author did not specify the preferred medium with
which to mix and prepare azure, but rather that the double-coating was
necessary for its color to persist.[^42]

**Azur-Grinding Experiment, 2018**

In February 2018, investigators from the Making and Knowing
Project—Pamela Smith, Tianna Uchacz, Tillman Taape, Sophie Pitman, and
Naomi Rosenkranz—reconstructed Ms. Fr. 640’s instruction on and warning
against grinding *azur* to its death.[^43] The team gathered the four
pre-ground pigments, to which azur could refer, to grind and paint out:
azurite, smalt, lapis, and verditer. The experiment set out to
investigate questions regarding the changing nature and properties of
azur in its preparations for painting. “How does the resistance to the
muller change over time? What about the sound, does it ‘sing’? Does the
colour ‘die,’ i.e. fade or become lighter or greyish?” In this section,
I will summarize the methods and results gleaned from the 2018 pigment
grinding experiment that sheds light on the understanding of *azur* in
Ms. Fr. 640.[^44]

The Making and Knowing team’s 2018 pigment-grinding experiment was
carried out in partial collaboration with another academic project led
by Alexander Marr at the University of Cambridge, entitled “Genius
Before Romanticism: Ingenuity in Early Modern Art and Science.” The
project explored the European imagination before the Romantic Concept of
“genius,” hosting several interdisciplinary events, including a session
by Spike Bucklow on “Azurite Crushing and Washing” at the Fitzwilliam
Museum.[^45] For several pigments, the more they are ground, the more
their brightness will be lost.[^46] Thus, the Making and Knowing
Project’s experiments have aimed to control a set of factors that
influenced a pigment’s observable change over the course of its
preparation for painting.

**Methodology**: The experiment was designed in two sections, “Pigment
Grinding, Part I (in water)” and “Pigment Grinding, Part II (in oil).”
The team conducted only Part I of the projected experiment, which
involved four parallel experiments, in which each investigator, with the
use of a glass muller, ground and painted out one pigment onto a glass
plate and mixed media paper (See Appendix 1). The experiment consisted
of the use of four Kremer pigments, namely azurite (#10200), smalt
(#10000), lapis (#1056020), and verditer (#10180) (See Appendix 2).[^47]
The team conducted these four experiments simultaneously and within a
shared laboratory space, which permitted shared methodological
conventions and vocabularies for describing the observed pigments. They
considered several lab actions before the experiment, including the
pressure on the pigments from grinding with various sizes of mullers.
Together, they agreed on the necessity for each investigator to use the
same size of muller to produce consistent results. The team also
designated one member to circulate between the four grinding stations,
responsible for photographing the individual color charts, timekeeping,
and enforcing methodological standards, such as grinding the pigment
with the same level of pressure. A consciousness about the replicability
and authenticity of reconstruction was at the forefront of the
experiment’s design.

The first step was to measure and place each pigment on a glass plate.
The amount of each pre-ground pigment, a quarter teaspoon by volume of
each pigment, was decided together on the day of the experiment. One
investigator suggested that working on a smaller scale would be
beneficial to the experiment in terms of “grinding until it \[*azur*\]
dies,” since the grinding would occur consistently on a small amount of
pigment. They acknowledged, however, that working with a small amount of
pigment could also pose its own challenges. Next, they placed the glass
plate on a piece of white paper so that they would gauge the color
change as they ground the pigment. Then they added water in small
increments to the piled pre-ground pigment until the consistency was
convenient for grinding.[^48] They set a timer and began grinding with a
large glass muller, with the original intention to photograph the glass
plate alongside a color chart every two minutes. During the experiment,
this timing convention was altered. Each pigment was ground in water and
incrementally painted out with water in 2-minute increments up until
minute 16:00. Then, the investigator opted for approximately 10-minute
increments between painting the sample out. Each investigator planned to
mix a small amount of ground pigment with gum arabic and paint out a
small test square onto a labelled and gridded mixed media paper. On the
day of experimentation, the team decided to paint out each ground
pigment with water between grinding intervals, and to paint out the
ground pigment with gum arabic only at the conclusion of grinding with
the final pigment.

**Azurite:** This pigment appeared to darken over the course of mulling
\[Fig. 2\]. Nonetheless, its robust blue remained. Under raking light,
the paint swatches have cracked appearances and have largely flaked off
since 2018. Up until minute 10, striations of the pigment particles are
visible \[Fig. 3\], while by minute 16, the swaths appear denser and
more cohesive \[Fig. 4\]. At the grinding conclusion at minute 45, the
azurite sample fades into a swath of matte blue, with a tinge of light
green \[Fig. 5\].

**Lapis:** According to the field notes, from the start, the lapis’
difference of particles was very clear, and it faded quickly as it dried
\[Fig. 6\]. With the addition of water, there was no grit against the
glass palette. By minute 10, it was smooth pulling and easier to apply
at minute 24 \[Figs. 7–8\]. The tone persisted; however, it appears to
have dampened over the course of mulling into a matte blue. Under raking
light, the samples seem to have dried inconsistently, resulting in
blotchy appearances. The team member responsible for this sample card
painted out the lapis twice at minute 45. The first swatch looks flakey
and matte, as if a layer of paint sits on the paper’s surface \[Fig.
9\]. The second sample looks thin and the whiteness of the paper from
below is more visible, like this swatch is primarily absorbed into the
medium below \[Fig. 10\].

**Smalt:** Up until minute 10, the smalt appears vibrant yet thin,
whereby the rich blue colour is concentrated only on the downstroke of
each swatch \[Fig. 11\]. Between minutes 12 and 16, the smalt appears to
hold more “body,” demonstrated by its more even application of colour
\[Figs. 12–13\]. The larger increments between minutes 24 and 45 reveal
smalt’s fading color. The short downstrokes at minute 24 preserve the
rich blue \[Fig. 14\], while the horizontal swipe below and within the
same box appears faint and blotchy \[Fig. 15\]. The investigator paints
out the pigments four times at minute 45, twice with water, once with
arabic gum, and once with walnut oil. The first swatch painted out with
water is more vibrant than the previous minutes, however the swatch
seems to have absorbed heavily into the mixed media paper, leaving
behind a grainy appearance \[Fig. 16\]. In the second time painting out
this sample with water, the smalt’s colour appears to fade substantially
\[Fig. 17\]. By contrast, the two painted-out samples with gum arabic
and walnut oil significantly darkened. In the 45-minute process of
grinding, the smalt revealed characteristics of vitality and decay.
While the pigment began thin, the grinding revitalized its “life”
halfway through the experiment followed by its “death” into a faint blue
by the end.

**Verditer:** The verditer held a particular vibrant blue across the
grinding experiment duration \[Fig. 18\]. Upon adding water at minute
zero, a filmy layer emerged. Between minutes 2 and 8, the substance was
slightly gritty with little difference in grinding texture \[Fig. 19\].
By minute 10, no grit was present, and it remained smooth to grind until
the end \[Fig. 20\]. While the texture was very smooth by minute 12, its
application became far easier to paint out at minute 24 \[Fig. 21\],
increasingly until minute 45 \[Fig. 22\]. From the observable sample, it
appears that verditer retained its bright blue, darkening slightly by
the conclusion.

**Azur-Grinding Experiment, 2024**

In November 2024, I conducted an azur-grinding experiment that
re-created Part II of the 2018 grinding experiment by the Making and
Knowing team, which introduced walnut oil to the mulling process. This
experiment aimed to replicate the 2018 procedure such that the two sets
of results could be cross-referenced and visually compared. My objective
was to take notes on the textures (course, smooth), application (easy,
difficult), and duration (of grinding, drying) of the mulled pigments to
attempt to identify when, where, and how the moment of azur’s death in
oil occurs. Guiding questions behind this experiment included: what
constitutes “death” in the mulling of azur with oil? This experiment
mulled a quarter teaspoon of the same four pre-ground Kremer pigments
used in the 2018 experiment, namely azurite, smalt, lapis, and
verditer.[^49]

The following procedure was executed once for each of the four pigments
\[Fig. 23\]: First, I poured the 1/4 tsp of pre-ground pigment into a
pile in the center of the glass palette. Then, I measured 1.5 ml of
Kremer walnut oil in a dropper and dispersed the drops of oil onto the
pigment pile.[^50] Next, I combined the pigment and oil together by
using a large muller. I began with a rough mulling technique, smoothing
the contents on the palette together in figure-8 pattern motions. Once
the pigment and oil were combined, I started the stopwatch and began
concentric mulling—small circular motions—with the large muller. As the
pigment-oil mixture covered an increased surface area of the palette,
due to the mulling motions, I used the palette knife to scrape the
pigment back into the center. I continued this mulling process, stopping
and painting the pigment out at the designated minute increments noted
on the mixed-media grid, the same intervals as the 2018 experiment (2,
4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 24, 34, 45-minutes).

To “paint-out,” I first took the flat oil brush and gathered a swab of
pigment from the center of the palette, then, I painted out one
horizontal swath in one or two brushstrokes. Then, I daubed a small,
pointed oil brush into different sections of pigment and painted out
three small, vertical strokes. At each step of the process, I took notes
on the texture (course, smooth), application (easy, difficult), and
consistency (high or low viscosity) that might have accounted for a
change of color and thus pigment “death.” The pigment tones appear to
have largely stayed the same, and the most observable change derived
from the change in particle distribution at various rates. The
interpretation of these results was supported by conservation equipment
in the Rare Books and Manuscript Library’s conservation lab.[^51]
Magnification was a useful tool for tracing the visible color change and
particle distribution change over the mulling period.

**Azurite:** Mulling azurite began particularly gritty, its particles
scratching against the glass palette \[Figs. 24–25\]. At around minute
18, it began to mix thoroughly and result in a more cohesive texture.
The painting-out method I employed, painting the pigment out in a
single-swipe, was effective for observing its change in particle
distribution and viscosity over the mulling period.[^52] By minute 34
and with use of a big muller, the azurite was smooth to pull. While the
pigment appeared as a dark blue in the mulling process, its painted-out
swatches reveal an unexpected green tone. Its greyish-green appearance
resembled the tone of Kremer’s pre-ground malachite more so than its
azurite.[^53] Under raking light, the swatches of azurite between
minutes 10–12 appear a more intense blue than at minute 45 where it
turns darker \[Fig. 26\]. Magnification of minute 2 makes it apparent
that the more the azurite was ground, the more its bright bluish hue
darkened and the more a greenish tone prevailed.

**Lapis:** The lapis sample was the smoothest sample to mull from the
start, because its particles were the smallest \[Figs. 27–28\]. The
pigment offered little to no grit or tension in mulling. From the
surface, its tone appeared to have remained consistent across the
45-minutes. Likewise, its particle distribution appeared little changed.
The lapis samples from minutes 12, 14, and 34 appear to have dense
swaths of paint at the ends of each horizontal paint stroke, which
demonstrates how the pigment soaked into the multi-media paper and
allowed another layer to sit on its surface to reveal a matte film. At
the time of painting-out, these films appeared as dark, saturated
patches, while their matte appearance revealed themselves only after
drying overnight \[Fig. 29\]. This material evidence might correspond to
the shininess described in Ms. Fr. 640’s which supposedly was not a good
sign for azure and caused it to die.[^54] The lapis samples under
magnification revealed less color change or “death” than the other three
pigments. Its most noticeable change, in addition to the expected
reduction in particle size, was the decreased intensity of the blue hue
and increased prevalence of a greyish hue \[Fig. 30\].

**Smalt:** The smalt samples revealed the most noticeable change in
particle distribution over the experiment \[Fig. 31\]. Mulling this
pigment introduced physical resistance between the glass muller and
palette. Between minutes 2 and 6, its grainy and coarse particles are
apparent, before transforming into more cohesive swaths of blue \[Fig.
32\]. By minute 45, a noticeable shift in tone was apparent,
particularly from a darker, vibrant blue to a lighter and duller blue
\[Fig. 33\].

**Verditer:** The verditer, similar to its visual results in the 2018
experiment appears a bright blue \[Fig. 34\]. The pigment was fairly
smooth to mull from the beginning, though became more cohesive to pull
by minute 24 onwards \[Fig. 35\]. Between minutes 16 and 30, I
experimented with the use of a small muller for changed physical or
sonic qualities of the pigment. When returning to the big muller at
minute 30, the smooth, gliding pigment began to “sing.” Under
magnification, a noticeable color change was present. Over the course of
mulling, the verditer’s bright blue was slowly replaced by darker swaths
of grey. The resulting appearance at minute 45 was a wash of dark blue
with dots of grey that were brightened to a light purple by the backdrop
of the white paper \[Fig. 36\].

In conclusion, this research explored the “death” of azur from a
multi-faceted approach, reconstructing early modern artisanal history
through literary analysis, data interpretation, and first-hand
experimentation. Together, these areas of study have informed more
nuanced perspectives about embodied knowledge of pigment production. The
results yielded in the Making and Knowing Project’s azur experiments
both align and contest with expectations about results, as indicated by
the passages in Ms. Fr. 640. The ground pigments in the 2018 water-based
experiment parallelled the subtlety of color change, darkening, and
fading in the 2024 oil-based experiment. Azurite darkened over the
course of mulling and faded into a greyish-green appearance. Lapis’ tone
persisted, as compared to the other pigments, but nonetheless revealed
slightly darkened and faded results under magnification. Smalt’s deep
vibrant blue transformed into a dull, lighter tone in both experiments.
Verditer’s bright blue darkened as it was mulled and showed a slight
color change into a greyish purple. The experiments reveal that there
was no one type of “death” in the paint preparation of azur. A pigment
“dying” could be identified as a color change, darkening, and fading to
various degrees.

Notably, Ms. Fr. 640’s description of azur’s intense “death” when ground
was not apparent in the material reconstructions. What does it mean when
we fail to capture in a recreation what these authors are saying? Why do
we face challenges in reconstructing early modern recipes? The text
raised the expectation that major color changes would occur, and a
pigment’s moment of “death” would be identifiable. The
author-practitioner also directed an understanding that results yielded
from azur ground in oil would differ greatly from water. As compared to
the manuscript’s statements, neither drastic color changes nor
differences between the same pigments ground with various binders
occurred. For example, the 2024 results, which demonstrated that azur
ground in oil darkened, disagreed with Ms. Fr. 640’s suggestions that
azur ground with oil caused its color to “die” *less* than when ground
with water.[^55] By contrast, the subtle color change and fading in the
2018 results misaligned with other excerpts in the manuscript that
cautioned against pigment preparation in oil and opted rather for
water.[^56] On the other side of the same coin, the text communicated an
awareness about azur’s color change when ground in either water or oil,
which was consistent with the experiments’ results. Nonetheless, the
qualitative results, which revealed only subtle changes in azur’s
appearance, did not seem to warrant the rhetoric of Ms. Fr. 640’s
description of its “death.” The lexicon is notoriously difficult to
assess, since the evaluation of color change was dependent on an
unwritten standard of measurement and on an unknown temporal span. The
magnified view of pigment swatches, which allowed the Making and Knowing
team to identify minute changes in brightness and particle size, would
have been an unnatural perspective for the sixteenth-century painter
preparing pigments. The experiments’ results might not be representative
of the color changes observed by early modern practitioners, or perhaps
the lexicon and color descriptions need to be re-defined. The
discrepancies between the written word and material evidence signals
broader issues with scholarly prioritization of textual sources that do
not necessarily align with the material processes they describe. One
cannot assume that the written word can replace or fully encapsulate
practical knowledge.[^57]

The results from the azur experiments, which differed from the
expectations raised by Ms. Fr. 640, challenge us to question the
authenticity of reconstructions and the level of certainty that they can
yield about the lived experiences of early modern artisans. Various
practical factors could have contributed to the limitations of the
experiments and their ability to determine the precise “death” of azur.
First, using demineralized water, as opposed to tap water, could have
changed the results. Additionally, the walnut oil used in the 2024
experiment added a yellow tone and saturation that, to an extent,
limited our ability to identify the optical properties of azur’s color
change and “death.” In response to this issue, one could conduct this
same procedure with an increased amount of pigment or reduced amount of
oil, such as doubling the pigment or halving the oil measurement.
Consolidation without visual change is difficult, however another
experiment could replicate the mulling process of blue pigments with a
different binder (e.g., gum arabic or gelatin) which could reduce the
yellowish tinge of the walnut oil that influenced the 2024 experiment
results which might reveal the color change more clearly. For instance,
the use of gelatin as a binder, in replacement of walnut oil, would
eliminate the yellow tinge from the color swatches but compromise the
historical accuracy of the experiment given that its use as a paint
binder began in the twentieth century.[^58]

The effect of paper brightness must also be accounted for when
interpreting the results. One could conduct another experiment with
repeated application, the “re-coat it twice” technique referenced in Ms.
Fr. 640’s fol. 65v, for the purpose that solid fields of color could be
more effective in assessing color change. In a further experiment,
spectrophotometry could measure color by capturing the amount of light a
color reflects, and might offer precise scientific data about the color
changes in azur in this experiment.[^59] The shape and size of the
particles affects the optical properties; thus, another experiment could
consider grinding the pre-ground Kremer pigments to a standardized
measurement.[^60] Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) could also be used
to identify the change of a pigment’s particle size over the course of
the grinding experiment.[^61] Other Making and Knowing Project
reconstructions of textual accounts in Ms. Fr. 640 have also faced
difficulties with making dye and pigment colors as anticipated from
their descriptions, which suggests that the unexpected results of azur’s
“death” was not an isolated incident.

To what extent should the written word be the standard by which we
should conduct hands-on reconstructions and assess their results?
Despite a text’s inability to fully encapsulate artisanal experience,
written sources are often the surviving evidence we have that reveal
glimpses of knowledge embedded in physical practices. While the written
manuscript necessarily distanced a reader from and abstracted the
material processes described, they nonetheless attempted to preserve an
understanding about artisanal making and doing. Perhaps scholars should
continue to interrogate period terms but with a more precise awareness
of their limitations. For instance, terms such as “azur” and color
“death” can be understood as mere guideposts about pigment
qualities—such as their volatile nature in paint preparation—rather than
guidelines for expected experimental results—such as the degrees to
which a pigment should retain its color. Yielding results that did not
necessarily align with, and even contradicted, the textual tradition
within which the experiment was documented is significant and encourages
us to think critically about the ontological categories with which we
label the world in binary terms, such as theory and practice.[^62]
Hands-on reconstructions inform greater understanding about how
pre-modern actors interacted with the material world and the conventions
by which they documented their observations. The reconstruction of
azur’s “death” draws awareness to the tacit dimension of knowledge that
emerges from hands-on history.[^63] Experiments that center embodied
knowledge challenge the priority that our academic culture has bestowed
upon writing and, instead, indicate reciprocity between practitioner and
materials.[^64]

**Appendix 1: Materials and Instruments**

- Azurite (Kremer standard, 10200), quantity: 1/4 tsp

- Lapis (Kremer, 1056020), ultramarine, quantity: 1/4 tsp

- Smalt (Kremer standard, 10000), quantity: 1/4 tsp

- Verditer (Kremer, 10180), quantity: 1/4 tsp

- Walnut oil (Kremer, 73550), quantity: 6 ml

- Water (tap, sourced from The Making and Knowing laboratory)

- Glass mullers (large, small)

- Glass palette

- Small plastic container (for oil)

- Dropper (for measuring oil)

- Mixing palette knife

- Oil brushes

- Mixed media paper (made gridded sample cards in advance)

- Color ruler

- Stopwatch (smartphone clock app)

**Appendix 2: Hazards Identification (MSDS)**

Azurite natural standard, Copper hydroxide carbonate:

> Classification according to EC Regulation 1272/2008: Acute toxicity
> (oral), hazard category 4. H302 Harmful if swallowed.
>
> Hazardous Ingredients: Cupric carbonate basic (Xn; R22; H302)

Natural Lapis Lazuli, sodium-aluminium-silicate, Ultramarine Blue
Pigment 29, C.I. 77007:

> Classification according to EC Regulation 1272/2008: This product does
> not require classification and labelling as hazardous according to
> CLP/GHS.

Smalt, standard, Cobalt potassium silicate glass, Pigment Blue 32,
C.I.77365:

> Classification according to EC Regulation 1272/2008: This product does
> not require classification and labelling as hazardous according to
> CLP/GHS.

Blue Verditer, CuCO3ïCu (OH)2 basic copper carbonate:

> Classification according to EC Regulation No.1272/2008 GHS
> Classification: Acute toxicity (oral), hazard category 4.
>
> Hazardous ingredients: Cupric carbonate basic (Xn; R22; 302)

Walnut Oil, Juglans Regia (walnut) seed oil, CAS No. 8024-09-7:

> Classification according to EC Regulation 1272/2008: This product does
> not require classification and labelling as hazardous according to
> CLP/GHS.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image19.png" style="width:6.93958in;height:2.29722in"
alt="A close-up of a document Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 1.** Detail of Fol. 58v, Ms. Fr. 640, in Pamela H. Smith et
al., *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital
Critical Edition and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*.

Photo: Sourced from Pamela H. Smith et al., *Secrets of Craft and Nature
in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition and English
Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*

**  
Figure. 2.** Azurite (Kremer \#10200) sample card, azur-grinding
experiment 2018, The Making and Knowing Laboratory, Columbia
University.<img src="./media-mckeever/image35.jpg" style="width:7.34028in;height:2.75694in"
alt="A row of colored strips of paint Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

Photo: Sheena McKeever.

**Figure 3.** Detail of minute 10, Azurite (Kremer \#10200) sample card,
azur-grinding experiment 2018.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image23.jpg" style="width:3.87014in;height:2.90208in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image13.jpg" style="width:3.86992in;height:2.90244in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 4.** Detail of minute 16, Azurite (Kremer \#10200) sample card,
azur-grinding experiment 2018.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image31.jpg" style="width:3.87014in;height:2.90278in"
alt="A close-up of a grey and white background Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 5.** Detail of minute 45, Azurite (Kremer \#10200) sample card,
azur-grinding experiment 2018.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 6.** Lapis Lazuli (Kremer \#1056020) sample card, azur-grinding
experiment 2018, The Making and Knowing Laboratory, Columbia
University.<img src="./media-mckeever/image36.jpg" style="width:7.75764in;height:2.58333in"
alt="A white board with different colors of paint on it Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image28.jpg" style="width:3.48194in;height:2.61111in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 7.** Detail of minute 10, Lapis Lazuli (Kremer \#1056020)
sample card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 8.** Detail of minute 24, Lapis Lazuli (Kremer \#1056020)
sample card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image4.jpg" style="width:3.49097in;height:2.61806in"
alt="A blue handprint on a white surface Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 9.** Detail of minute 45 (1), Lapis Lazuli (Kremer \#1056020)
sample card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image32.jpg" style="width:3.65069in;height:2.7375in"
alt="A close-up of a blue sky Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image27.jpg" style="width:3.65694in;height:2.74306in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 10.** Detail of minute 45 (2), Lapis Lazuli (Kremer \#1056020)
sample card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image15.jpg" style="width:7.98125in;height:2.09722in"
alt="A white wall with a white tile with different colored strips Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

**Figure 11**. Smalt (Kremer \#10000) sample card, azur-grinding
experiment 2018, The Making and Knowing Laboratory, Columbia University.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever.

**Figure 12.** Detail of minute 12, Smalt (Kremer \#10000) sample card,
azur-grinding experiment 2018.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image26.jpg" style="width:3.79792in;height:2.84861in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image14.jpg" style="width:3.79861in;height:2.84861in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 13.** Detail of minute 16, Smalt (Kremer \#10000) sample card,
azur-grinding experiment 2018.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image12.jpg" style="width:3.79861in;height:2.84861in"
alt="Blue and white spots on a white surface Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 14.** Detail of minute 24 (1), Smalt (Kremer \#10000) sample
card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 15.** Detail of minute 24 (2), Smalt (Kremer \#10000) sample
card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image33.jpg" style="width:3.77431in;height:2.83056in"
alt="A close-up of a grey surface Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image6.jpg" style="width:3.78264in;height:2.83611in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 16.** Detail of minute 45 (1), Smalt (Kremer \#10000) sample
card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image2.jpg" style="width:3.7875in;height:2.84028in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white surface Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 17.** Detail of minute 45 (2), Smalt (Kremer \#10000) sample
card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 18**. Verditer (Kremer \#10180) sample card, azur-grinding
experiment 2018, The Making and Knowing Laboratory, Columbia
University.<img src="./media-mckeever/image20.jpg" style="width:7.37639in;height:2.54167in"
alt="A white board with a chart and a ruler Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever.

**Figure 19.** Detail of minute 8, Verditer (Kremer \#10180) sample
card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image17.jpg" style="width:3.61042in;height:2.70833in"
alt="A close-up of a blue spot Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image1.jpg" style="width:3.61042in;height:2.70764in"
alt="A blue and white rectangular object Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 20.** Detail of minute 10, Verditer (Kremer \#10180) sample
card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 21**. Detail of minute 24, Verditer (Kremer \#10180) sample
card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image7.jpg" style="width:4.87083in;height:3.65208in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white speckled surface Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image30.jpg" style="width:4.82361in;height:3.61736in"
alt="A blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 22**. Detail of minute 45, Verditer (Kremer \#10180) sample
card, azur-grinding experiment 2018.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 23.** Materials and instruments for 2024 azur-grinding
experiment, November 2024, The Making and Knowing Laboratory, Columbia
University.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image18.jpg" style="width:5.53264in;height:3.60139in"
alt="A desk with a phone and a pen and a calendar Description automatically generated with medium confidence" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image34.jpg" style="width:4.23542in;height:5.07292in"
alt="A close-up of a chart Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 24**. Azurite (Kremer \#10180) sample card, azur-grinding
experiment 2024, The Making and Knowing Laboratory, Columbia University.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever.

**Figure 25.** Detail of minute 2, Azurite (Kremer \#10200) sample card,
azur-grinding experiment 2024.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image21.jpg" style="width:4.59861in;height:3.44861in"
alt="A close-up of a marbled surface Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image9.jpg" style="width:4.57778in;height:3.43194in"
alt="A close-up of clouds in the sky Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 26.** Detail of minute 45, Azurite (Kremer \#10200) sample
card, azur-grinding experiment 2024.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 27.** Lapis Lazuli (Kremer \#1056020) sample card,
azur-grinding experiment 2024, The Making and Knowing Laboratory,
Columbia
University.<img src="./media-mckeever/image5.jpg" style="width:5.72708in;height:4.34028in"
alt="A white board with blue paint on it Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever

<img src="./media-mckeever/image25.jpg" style="width:4.73542in;height:3.55069in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white speckled surface Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 28.** Detail of minute 2, Lapis Lazuli (Kremer \#1056020)
sample card, azur-grinding experiment 2024.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 29**. Detail of left-edge film at minute 34, Lapis Lazuli
(Kremer \#1056020) sample card, azur-grinding experiment 2024.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image22.jpg" style="width:4.68958in;height:3.51667in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image29.jpg" style="width:4.68403in;height:3.51181in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 30.** Detail of minute 45, Lapis Lazuli (Kremer \#1056020)
sample card, azur-grinding experiment 2024.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 31.** Smalt (Kremer \#10000) sample card, azur-grinding
experiment 2024, The Making and Knowing Laboratory, Columbia
University.<img src="./media-mckeever/image11.jpg" style="width:4.03472in;height:5.27569in"
alt="A close-up of a chart Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image16.jpg" style="width:4.74514in;height:3.55903in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white speckled surface Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 32**. Detail of minute 2, Smalt (Kremer \#10000) sample card,
azur-grinding experiment 2024.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

**Figure 33**. Detail of minute 45, Smalt (Kremer \#10000) sample card,
azur-grinding experiment 2024.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image24.jpg" style="width:4.68958in;height:3.51667in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image8.jpg" style="width:4.09306in;height:5.52847in"
alt="A white board with blue paint on it Description automatically generated" />

**Figure 34.** Verditer (Kremer \#10180) sample card, azur-grinding
experiment 2024, The Making and Knowing Laboratory, Columbia University.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever.

**Figure 35.** Detail of minute 2, Verditer (Kremer \#10180) sample
card, azur-grinding experiment 2024.
<img src="./media-mckeever/image10.jpg" style="width:4.58819in;height:3.44028in"
alt="A close-up of a blue and white background Description automatically generated" />

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

<img src="./media-mckeever/image3.jpg" style="width:4.5875in;height:3.44028in"
alt="A blue sky with white clouds Description automatically generated" />

**Figure.** Detail of minute 45, Verditer (Kremer \#10180) sample card,
azur-grinding experiment 2024.

Photo: by Sheena McKeever using Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series,
Dino-Lite Edge computer software.

Works Cited

**Primary literature**

De Mayerne, Théodore. *Pictoria sculptoria & quae subalternarum artium.*
1620.

De Piles, Roger. *Élémens de peinture pratique*. Paris: 1766 \[1684\].

Félibien, André. *Des principes de l'architecture, de la sculpture*.
1699.

Florio, John. *Dictionarie of the Italian and English Tongues*. 1611.

*Le Dictionnaire de l'Académie française*. Paris: Coignard, 1694.

Lebrun, Pierre. *Recueil des essaies des merveilles de la peinture*.
1635.

Making and Knowing Project, Pamela H. Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna
Helena Uchacz, Tillmann Taape, Clément Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny
Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna Bilak, Marc Smith, and Terry Catapano,
eds., *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital
Critical Edition and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*. New York:
Making and Knowing Project, 2020.
doi: [<u>https://edition640.makingandknowing.org</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/).

Merrifield, Mary. *Medieval and Renaissance Treatises on the Arts of
Painting: Original Texts with English Translations*. New York: Dover
Publications, 2012.

**Secondary literature**

Barad, Karen. “Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of
How Matter Comes to Matter.” *Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and
Society* 28 (2003): 801–31. doi:
[<u>https://doi.org/10.1086/345321</u>](https://doi.org/10.1086/345321)

Baxandall, Michael. *Painting and Experience in Fifteenth-Century
Italy*. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1974.

Bol, Marjolijn, Grace Kim-Butler, Jan van Daal, Henrike Scholten, and
Clara Mikellides De Chiaro. ERC-project DURARE, “Dynamics of the
Durable: A History of Making Things Last in the Visual and Decorative
Arts.” *European Research Council*, 2020. [<u>ArtLab / KunstLab \|
ERC-project: Dynamics of the Durable: A History of Making Things Last in
the Visual and Decorative
Arts</u>](https://artlab.sites.uu.nl/2024/02/26/dynamics-of-the-durable-a-history-of-making-things-last-in-the-visual-and-decorative-arts/)

———. *The Varnish and the Glaze: Painting Splendor with Oil, 1100–1500*.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2023.

Bono, J.J. “Making Knowledge: History, Literature, and the Poetics of
Science.” *Isis* 101 (2010): 555–59. doi:
<u><https://doi.org/10.1086/655792></u>

Boulboullé, Jenny and Maartje Stols-Witlox. “Working (with) the *Corps*.
The Body of Sands, Colors, and Varnishes in Ms. Fr. 640.” In *Secrets of
Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition and
English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, edited by Making and Knowing
Project, Pamela H. Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna Helena Uchacz,
Tillmann Taape, Clément Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny Boulboullé, Joel
Klein, Donna Bilak, Marc Smith, and Terry Catapano. New York: Making and
Knowing Project, 2020. doi:
[<u>https://www.doi.org/10.7916/jyms-a974</u>](https://www.doi.org/10.7916/jyms-a974)

Catalano, I.M., A. Genga, C. Laganara, R. Laviano, A. Mangone, D.
Marano, and A. Traini. “Lapis lazuli usage for blue decoration of
polychrome painted glazed pottery.” *Journal of Archaeological Science*
34, no. 4 (2007): 503–11. doi:
[<u>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2006.05.010</u>](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2006.05.010)

De Boer, J. R. J. Van Asperen. “An Examination of Particle Size
Distributions of Azurite and Natural Ultramarine in Some Early
Netherlandish Paintings.” *Studies in Conservation* 19, no. 4 (1974):
233–43. doi: <u><https://doi.org/10.2307/1505730></u>

Fan, Ruilin. “‘Flesh Color’ and Race Making in Early Modern Painters’
Manuals.” In *The Making and Knowing Project, Research Teaching
Companion*. 2023.
[<u>https://teaching640.makingandknowing.org/resources/student-projects/sp23_fan_ruilin_final-project_flesh-color/</u>](https://teaching640.makingandknowing.org/resources/student-projects/sp23_fan_ruilin_final-project_flesh-color/)

Ferrão, Leonor Carmo Rosa Mendes. “Historical Reconstructions of Raw
Materials Based on a Blue Smalt Coating Applied to a Seventeenth-Century
Altarpiece,” PhD diss. Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2015.   

Garris, Carl. “What is *Azur* in Ms. Fr. 640?” In *Secrets of Craft and
Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition and English
Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, edited by Making and Knowing Project,
Pamela H. Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna Helena Uchacz, Tillmann Taape,
Clément Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna
Bilak, Marc Smith, and Terry Catapano. New York: Making and Knowing
Project, 2020. doi:
[<u>https://www.doi.org/10.7916/e115-w212</u>](https://www.doi.org/10.7916/e115-w212)

Hagadorn, Alexis. “An Investigation into the Use of Blue Copper Pigments
in European Early Printed Books.” *American Institute for Conservation
of Historic and Artistic Works, Book and Paper Group, Book and Paper
Group Annual* 23 (2004): 41–55.

Hall, Marcia. *Color and Meaning: Practice and Theory in Renaissance
Painting*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.

Kirby, Jo and Marika Spring. “Ms. Fr. 640 in the World of Pigments in
Sixteenth-Century Europe.” In *Secrets of Craft and Nature in
Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition and English Translation
of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, edited by Making and Knowing Project, Pamela H.
Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna Helena Uchacz, Tillmann Taape, Clément
Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna Bilak, Marc
Smith, and Terry Catapano. New York: Making and Knowing Project, 2020.
doi:
[<u>https://www.doi.org/10.7916/vsrt-8r31</u>](https://www.doi.org/10.7916/vsrt-8r31)

Mattei, E., G. de Vivo, A. De Santis, C. Gaetani, C. Pelosi, U.
Santamaria. “Raman spectroscopic analysis of azurite blackening.”
*Journal of Raman Spectroscopy* 39, no. 2 (2008): 302–6. doi:
[<u>https://doi.org/10.1002/jrs.1845</u>](https://doi.org/10.1002/jrs.1845)

Mikhailov, Oleg. “Gelatin as It Is: History and Modernity.”
*International Journal of Molecular Sciences* 24 (2023): 3583.
doi: [<u>10.3390/ijms24043583</u>](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24043583).

Murphy, Neil. *Plague, Towns and Monarchy in Early Modern France*.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2024.

Nishimura, Ryoichi and Ari Ide-Ektessabi. “The Relation between the Fine
Structural Change and Color Fading in the Natural Mineral Pigments
Azurite and Malachite.” MRS Online Proceedings Library 1047 (2007). doi:
[<u>https://doi.org/10.1557/PROC-1047-Y03-01</u>](https://doi.org/10.1557/PROC-1047-Y03-01)

Nisse, Cleo. “Shadows Beneath the Skin: How to Paint Faces in
Distemper.” In *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A
Digital Critical Edition and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*,
edited by Making and Knowing Project, Pamela H. Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz,
Tianna Helena Uchacz, Tillmann Taape, Clément Godbarge, Sophie Pitman,
Jenny Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna Bilak, Marc Smith, and Terry
Catapano. New York: Making and Knowing Project, 2020. doi:
[<u>https://www.doi.org/10.7916/a6bs-0765</u>](https://www.doi.org/10.7916/a6bs-0765)

Panzanelli, Roberta. *The Color of Life: Polychromy in Sculpture from
Antiquity to the Present*. Los Angeles: The Getty Research Institute,
2008.

Pastoureau, Michel. *Blue: The History of a Color.* Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2001.

Polanyi, Michael. *The Tacit Dimension*. London: Routledge, 1966.

Price, Michael. “Two Author-Practitioners in Dialogue across Time.” In
*Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical
Edition and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, edited by Making
and Knowing Project, Pamela H. Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna Helena
Uchacz, Tillmann Taape, Clément Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny
Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna Bilak, Marc Smith, and Terry Catapano. New
York: Making and Knowing Project, 2020. doi:
[<u>https://doi.org/10.7916/x5kc-kj05</u>](https://doi.org/10.7916/x5kc-kj05)

Roy, Ashok. *Artists' Pigments: A Handbook of Their History and
Characteristics*, Volume 2. Washington: National Gallery of Art, 1986.

Smith, Pamela. *From Lived Experience to the Written Word:
Reconstructing Practical Knowledge in the Early Modern World*. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2022.

Totaro, Rebecca and Ernest B. Gilman. *Representing the Plague in Early
Modern England*. New York: Routledge, 2010.

Varlik, Nükhet. *Plague and Empire in the Early Modern Mediterranean
World: The Ottoman Experience, 1347–1600*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2015.

Vicum, Lars, Marco Mazzotti, and Martin Iggland. “Precipitation and
Crystallization of Pigments.” In *Handbook of Industrial
Crystallization*, 479–512. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019.

[^1]: Thanks to the Rare Books and Manuscript Library’s conservation
    team at Columbia University, especially Alexis Hagadorn, for
    providing me access to the magnification and photography equipment,
    as well as their perspectives on color change from a conservation
    perspective. Additional thanks to Pamela Smith and Caroline Surman
    for their accommodation and guidance in overseeing my lab
    experiments, as well as Tillman Taape and Naomi Rosenkranz for their
    insights on the 2018 Making & Knowing Project’s pigment-grinding
    experiments. Unless otherwise noted, transcriptions and translations
    of Italian and French have been respectively sourced from Mary
    Merrifield, *Medieval and Renaissance Treatises of the Arts of
    Painting* and Making and Knowing Project, et al., *Secrets of Craft
    and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition and
    English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*.

[^2]: See Making and Knowing Project, et al., *Secrets of Craft and
    Nature in Renaissance France.* Other colors and substances are also
    referred to in terms of “death” and “killing” in Ms. Fr. 640,
    including Aspic oil \[Fol. 6r\], lavender \[Fol. 4r\], and red
    \[Fol. 118v\].

[^3]: See Michael Baxandall, *Painting and Experience* on the “Period
    Eye,” a concept that encourages scholars to reconstruct the
    phenomena of a given period on its own socially constructed terms.

[^4]: Jo Kirby and Marika Spring, “Ms. Fr. 640 in the World of Pigments
    in Sixteenth-Century Europe,” in *Secrets of Craft and Nature in
    Renaissance France*. See Alexis Hagadorn, “An Investigation into the
    Use of Blue Copper Pigments in European Early Printed Books.”

[^5]: Kirby and Spring, “Ms. Fr. 640 in the World of Pigments in
    Sixteenth-Century Europe.”

[^6]: Carl Garris, “What is *Azur* in Ms. Fr. 640?” in *Secrets of Craft
    and Nature in Renaissance France.*

[^7]: Ruilin Fan, “‘Flesh Color’ and Race Making in Early Modern
    Painters’ Manuals,” in *The Making and Knowing Project, Research and
    Teaching Companion*; Cleo Nisse, “Shadows Beneath the Skin,” in
    *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France*; Jenny
    Boulboullé and Maartje Stols-Witlox, “Working (with) the *Corps*,”
    in *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France.* See also
    Roberta Panzanelli, *The Color of Life*.

[^8]: See Michel Pastoureau, *Blue: The History of a Color*, Chapter 1,
    “An Uncommon Color” and Marcia Hall, *Color and Meaning* on the
    symbolic language of color.

[^9]: Mary Merrifield, *Medieval and Renaissance Treatises on the Arts
    of Painting*, “Bolognese Manuscript,” 518-21. “Death” in this
    manuscript can be compared to the equally vivid description of blood
    yielded from a “calf fresh killed” \[Lat. *morbido*\] and a
    necessary ingredient for the softening of crystal, *Ad lapides
    anullorum componendos*, “To soften crystal previous to stamping or
    carving it like wax.”

[^10]: Merrifield, 340–43.

[^11]: Merrifield, 342–43: “*se la dicta petra sta in suo colore che non
    smortisca e bona*.”

[^12]: Merrifield, 342–43: “*Ma se devinisse che la petra perdesse tutto
    el colore…non sonno de ultramare e non sonno fini e per
    consequential non ne poresti cavare azurro ultramarine...*”

[^13]: John Florio, *Dictionarie of the Italian and English tongues*,
    300, 314, 530.

[^14]: Florio, 368, 505.

[^15]: Merrifield, 342–43: “*Ma quelle che mutano la bellezza dal primo
    collore e da considerer in quanti gradi se mutano per che ce sonno
    de quelle che quanto piu montano tanto sonno piu fini.*”

[^16]: See Ms. Fr. 640, fol. 118v on red, where the term “death” is used
    rather in a neutral, if not positive, sense to describe the craft of
    letting the redness of heated vessels die.

[^17]: Merrifield, 342–43.

[^18]: Transcriptions have been respectively sourced from Roger de
    Piles, *Élémens de peinture pratique* (A Amsterdam et a Léipsick:
    Chez Arkstée & Merkus, 1776) via HathiTrust digital copy from the
    Getty Research Institute, and Théodore de Mayerne, *Pictoria
    sculptoria & quae subalternarum artium* (1620–46) via ARTECHNE’s
    revised transcription of British Library MS Sloane 2052. All
    translations are by the author. Thanks to Tillmann Taape for
    introducing me to the Mayerne Manuscript.

[^19]: Merrifield, 814–15: “*Le couleur de la thoille imprimee se dit
    couleur mate, c’est-a-dire, qui est comme mort, a cause de l’huile
    grasse*.” See Kirby and Spring, “Ms. Fr. 640 in the World of
    Pigments in Sixteenth-Century Europe.”

[^20]: De Piles, *Élémens de peinture pratique*, 128–29: “*Il y a des
    Peintres que aiment mieux les toiles qui n’ont qu’une seule couche /
    de couleur & qui les préferent à celles qui en ont deux, parce
    qu’elles sont moins mourir les couleurs & qu’elles se roulent plus
    facilement quand on veut les transporter.*”

[^21]: MS Sloane 2052, Fol. 11r *NB. L’esmail meurt facilement…*; Fol.
    23v “*Le bleu de Cyanus ne vaut rien & meurt incontinent.*”

[^22]: MS Sloane 2052, fol. 9v: “*La mort des couleurs est quand l’huyle
    nageante au dessus se seiche & faict une peau, qui noircit à lair.
    Il y a quelques couleur, et les Esmaulx entraultres qui ne se
    meslent pas aisement avec l’huyle, ains vont tousjours à fonds sans
    se lier, & ainsi meurent facilement* \[&?\] *noircissent.*”

[^23]: MS Sloane 2052, fol. 11r: “*Le Bleu peult estre couché a
    destrempo auec colle sur vostro imprimeure a huyle (frottés auec suc
    d’ail) puis estant sec appliqués un bon vernix subtil & fort
    siccatif. Ainsi vostre bleu ne meurt jamais.*”

[^24]: MS Sloane 2052, fol. 4v: “*Quand on trauaille auec Bleu si on
    adjouste à la cendre d'Azur vn peu d’huyle d’Aspic, la couleur ne
    meurt pas.*” See also MS Sloane 2052, fol. 9v; 11r.

[^25]: Merrifield, 823: “*Le verd-de-gris*…*et fait mourir tous les
    couleurs permy lesquelz il est meslez.*”

[^26]: De Piles, 113: “*En effet ces tableaux ne peroissent plus dans la
    suite que comme un brouillard coloré & sans aucune vivacité, parce
    que la trop grand quantité d’huile, principalement celle de
    thérébentine, absorbe & fait mourir les couleurs.*”

[^27]: De Piles, 124: “*Le verd-de-gris est la peste de toutes les
    couleurs, & il est capable de perdre tout un tableau s’il en entroit
    la moindre partie dans l’imprimure d’une toile… Quelquefois on le
    calcine pour lui ôter sa malignité & le render le plus durable, mail
    il est dangereux à calciner aussi-bien que l’orpin; & quelque
    purifié qu’il puisse être, il ne faut l’employer que fuel, car il
    gâteroit les couleurs avec lesquelles on pourroit le meler.*” Cf.
    André Félibien’s *Des principes de l'architecture, de la sculpture*
    (1699) for the same passage reproduced.

[^28]: See Roy, *Artists' Pigments: A Handbook of Their History and
    Characteristics* on verdigris. See also Neil Murphy, *Plague, Towns
    and Monarchy in Early Modern France*; Nükhet Varlik, *Plague and
    Empire in the Early Modern Mediterranean World*; Rebecca Totaro
    and Ernest B. Gilman, *Representing the Plague in Early Modern
    England*.

[^29]: Merrifield, 824–25, entry 4: “*maintenant* *il faut mettre
    dessous, qu’un tel peignoit de peur qu’on ne crut que ce sont des
    morts qu’on a collé sur la toile…*”

[^30]: See Pamela Smith, *From Lived Experience to the Written Word*,
    chapter 9, “Reconstructing Practical Knolwedge,” 204–6.

[^31]: Michael Price, “Two Author-Practitioners in Dialogue across
    Time,” in *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France*.

[^32]: See Marjolijn Bol, *The Varnish and the Glaze* on early modern
    treatments of oil in painting.

[^33]: Ms. Fr. 640, fol. 58v: “*Lazur desmail haict plus / destre broye
    que nul aultre / mesmement a leau car / il se meurt & perd toute /
    sa couleur…*”

[^34]: Ms. Fr. 640, fol. 58v: “*…Touteffois / pourceque il ne se peult /
    travailler sil est gros / broye non avecq eau / Mays avecq huile &
    le broye / espes et en ceste sorte il ne se / mourra pas tant*.”

[^35]: Definitions are sourced from *Le Dictionnaire de l'Académie
    française*.

[^36]: Kirby and Spring, “Ms. Fr. 640 in the World of Pigments in
    Sixteenth-Century Europe.”

[^37]: Ms. Fr. 640, fol. 11r: “*Les cendres <sup>dazur</sup> ne sont
    bonnes que pour les paisages car elles / se meurent a huile Il ny a
    que lazur vray qui tienne*.”

[^38]: Ms. Fr. 640, fol. 61v: “*Et si tu nen / trouves dasses subtil Tu
    le peulx bien broyer non a eau / mays a huile & le broyer espes*.”

[^39]: Ms. Fr. 640, fol. 61v. “*Lazur aussy broye / a huile demeure
    tousjours / luisant Ce qui nest / pas bon signe a lazur / car cela
    le fait / mourir.*”

[^40]: Ms. Fr. 640, fol. 61v: “*Lazur veult estre / couche net cest
    pourquoy / quan il se meurt tousjours / quelque peu quand pour /
    reparer un vieulx tableau / on le couche sur de / vieulx azur desja
    / terny*.”

[^41]: Ms. Fr. 640, fol. 65v, “Semi-lively colors”: “*Mays cest le
    meilleur pourveu / que tu recouches deulx fois Car les couleurs en
    ceste sorte / ayant plus de corps ne meurent point & en sont bien
    plus / belles, mesmem{ent} lazur la laque & ceulx qui nont point de
    corps.*”

[^42]: See Marjolijn Bol, et al., ERC-project DURARE, “Dynamics of the
    Durable” that maps how artisans acquired knowledge about and
    manipulated the stability and behavior of artistic materials.

[^43]: See Smith, *From Lived Experience*, 206–7 on the nature of
    reconstructing early modern experiments.

[^44]: Documentary evidence for 2018 has been granted by the Making and
    Knowing Project, namely “SP18 Blues Reconstruction.”

[^45]: See Genius Before Romanticism: Ingenuity in Early Modern Art and
    Science (2014–2019), CRASSH, University of Cambridge:
    [<u>https://www.crassh.cam.ac.uk/research/projects-centres/genius-before-romanticism/</u>](https://www.crassh.cam.ac.uk/research/projects-centres/genius-before-romanticism/).
    The workshop also included team members from Sachiko Kusukawa’s
    Making Visible Project and with the support of the Fitzwilliam
    Museum’s curatorial team of the “Madonnas and Miracles” exhibit
    (March–June 2017).

[^46]: See Ryoichi Nishimura and Ari Ide-Ektessabi, “The Relation
    between the Fine Structural Change and Color Fading in the Natural
    Mineral Pigments Azurite and Malachite” and Leonor Carmo Rosa Mendes
    Ferrão, “Historical Reconstructions of Raw Materials Based on a Blue
    Smalt Coating Applied to a Seventeenth-Century Altarpiece” on the
    fade resistance of azurite and smalt.

[^47]: See Ashok Roy, *Artists' Pigments: A Handbook of Their History
    and Characteristics* on azurite, smalt, natural ultramarine blue,
    and blue verditer. In April 2018, two months after the experiment,
    the team investigated the differences between the blues used in the
    Making and Knowing experiment at the Morgan Library Conservation
    Lab.

[^48]: Both Making and Knowing Project experiments used water from the
    tap in the laboratory.

[^49]: Kremer azurite (#10200), smalt (#10000), lapis (#1056020), and
    verditer (#10180).

[^50]: Kremer walnut oil (#73550).

[^51]: Equipment used to analyze results included Meiji microscope,
    Dino-Lite Edge / 5MP AM7515 Series, Dino-Lite Edge computer
    software, and Nikon Camera Control Pro 2.

[^52]: J. R. J. Van Asperen De Boer, “An Examination of Particle Size
    Distributions of Azurite and Natural Ultramarine in Some Early
    Netherlandish Paintings.”

[^53]: Cf. Kremer, Malachite natural (#10300).

[^54]: Ms. Fr. 640, Fol. 61v.

[^55]: Ms. Fr. 640, fols. 58v, 61v.

[^56]: Ms. Fr. 640, fols. 11r, 61v.

[^57]: Smith, *From Lived Experience*, 204–6.

[^58]: See Oleg Mikhailov, “Gelatin as It Is: History and Modernity” on
    “bloom strength,” the measurement of gelatin’s firmness.

[^59]: See E. Mattei et al., “Raman spectroscopic analysis of azurite
    blackening,” 302–6.

[^60]: Lars Vicum, Marco Mazzotti, and Martin Iggland, “Precipitation
    and Crystallization of Pigments,” in *Handbook of Industrial
    Crystallization*.

[^61]: For the use of SEM in artisanal research, see I. M. Catalano et
    al., “Lapis lazuli usage for blue decoration of polychrome painted
    glazed pottery.”

[^62]: See J.J. Bono, “Making Knowledge: History, Literature, and the
    Poetics of Science.”

[^63]: See Michael Polanyi, *The Tacit Dimension*.

[^64]: See Karen Barad, “Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an
    Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter.”
