# To Redden (*Rougir*): the Language of Color, Observation, and Transformation in Ms. Fr. 640

Roya Chu, Fall 2024

The interests of Ms. Fr. 640’s author-practitioner were highly
disparate, and yet there is one noticeable thread that runs through the
disordered recipes of the manuscript – color.[^1] Color emerges as a
prominent concern across recipes for metalwork, glasswork, woodwork,
painting, material imitation and sleight of hand tricks. The
author-practitioner’s fascination with color can be gleaned from many
aspects, from his emphasis on the decorative value of his crafts (e.g.,
his interest in producing colored wood among all aspects of woodwork),
to his frequent allusion to color changes as procedural references in
his late sixteenth-century Toulousain workshop.[^2] The epistemological
attention to color transformation in this manuscript was far from
unusual within the broader genre of artisanal writings from this period.
Before it was reclassified as a reflection of light with the advent of
optical theory in the seventeenth century, color, instead of light,
served as the basic unit in discussions of visual observation in early
modern Europe.[^3] As a manuscript that focuses heavily on metalwork
recipes, the color red bears a remarkably heavy imprint in the pages of
Ms. Fr. 640. Among the 130 mentions of the color red in the manuscript,
it can be found in the form of its verb – “to redden” (*rougir*) – in 43
cases.

Due to the importance of color to the early modern artisan’s
observational epistemology, color references tend to blend easily into
the discursive background of artisanal texts. For instance, the English
translation of the manuscript for *Secrets of Craft and Nature*
occasionally uses the terms “heat” (*chaleur*) and “redden” (*rougir*)
interchangeably when describing the heating of metals \[e.g. fol.
[<u>40r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/40r/f/40r/tl),
[<u>48v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/48v/f/48v/tl)\].
Previous examinations of color for *Secrets of Craft and Nature* suggest
that the manuscript treats optical effects and substance-processes as
inseparable, reflected in the author-practitioner’s use of “*or mat*” to
refer to both the gold color created by gilding and the material process
of gilding itself.[^4] Another study highlights how color offered a
semantic resource for encoding and thus articulating “ineffable”
artisanal practices that rely on tacit knowledge.[^5] Encoding knowledge
was a very common and useful strategy in the early modern workshop,
where material and environmental conditions tended to be highly
variable. Qualitative visual cues, such as indications of color or
consistency, often provided artisans with more precise instructions than
fixed quantitative measurements.[^6] These insights on the
author-practitioner’s use of colors clarify his approach to material
generation as a process that simultaneously engages form and substance,
human artifice and nature’s transformational forces.[^7] Colors, visual
deception and counterfeit materials therefore constituted an important
facet of the author-practitioner’s efforts to imitate nature’s material
creations.

This productive dialogue on the interlinked nature of the visual and
material worlds in the manuscript has, however, often conditioned
researchers to overlook the uniqueness of visual language within the
semantic world of Ms. Fr. 640. This tendency risks conflating a verb
like “redden” with “heat,” or equating the verb simply with the action
of making something turn red, which may cause the nuanced meanings and
application of these terms to slip away. Rather, the
author-practitioner’s frequent alternation between “redden” and its
alternatives underscores a conscious effort to maintain their semantic
distinctions (see his repetition of “reheat & redden” (*recuire &
rougir*) \[fols.
[<u>81v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/81v/f/81v/tl),
[<u>119r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/119r/f/119r/tl),
[<u>119v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/119v/f/119v/tl),
[<u>161r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/161r/f/161r/tl)\],
and pairing of “redden” (*rougir*) with “inflame” (*enflammer*) and
“ignition” (*ignition*) \[fols.
[<u>12v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/12v/f/12v/tl),
[<u>111r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/111r/f/111r/tl),
[<u>148v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/148r/f/148r/tl)\]).
How, and why, then, did the author-practitioner distinguish between
visual indications and material changes? Why did colors, specifically,
play such an important role in both the author-practitioner’s semantic
toolset, and in how he chooses to frame many of his artisanal recipes?

## Redness, Heat, and the Body (*Corps*) in Ms. Fr. 640

The verb “to redden” (*rougir*) often appears alongside “to reheat”
(*recuire*) in the manuscript, such as: “I reheated it \[latten – a
copper alloy\], that is to say reddened” \[fol.
[<u>147v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/147v/f/147v/tl)\],
or “reheating is to redden the frame” \[fol.
[<u>118v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/118v/f/118v/tl)\].
One possible way of interpreting “redden” in this context is to treat it
as an optical observation, a description of the color change observed in
metals when they reach a certain temperature. The red color change was
indeed a familiar formula used by the author-practitioner to quantify
heat intensity in metalwork recipes \[e.g., fols.
[<u>57r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/57r/f/57r/tl),
[<u>115v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/115v/f/115v/tl),
[<u>128r–v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/128r/f/128r/tl),
[<u>140v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/140v/f/140v/tl),
[<u>149r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/149r/f/149r/tl),
[<u>151r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/151r/f/151r/tl)\].
For instance, his advice for softening lead and tin with heat was to
“melt it without reddening it” \[fol.
[<u>150r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/150r/f/150r/tl)\].
Color change in metals, more generally, was a useful indicator of when
metals were ready for casting: “When gold reaches its perfect heat, it
is green like an emerald” \[fol.
[<u>124v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/124v/f/124v/tl)\];
“When it \[lead\] is very hot, it becomes blue, let it then pass this
color & rest a little before casting” \[fol.
[<u>72v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/72v/f/72v/tl)\].

However, the author-practitioner’s use of “reddening” as a verb was not
confined to a literal observation of a material’s manifested color. It
is important to note that he does not use colors as verbs to refer to
heating procedures which result in other color changes aside from the
color red. In the entries quoted above, the author-practitioner simply
states that gold should appear “green” (*verd*) and lead “blue”
(*bleu*), when each was heated to a sufficient temperature. Similarly,
the color “white” (*blanc*) remains a noun in a recipe that describes
heating latten, where latten is made “white from the force of being hot”
(*fort blanc de force d’estre chault*). Meanwhile, the verb “whitening”
(*blanchiment*) is associated only with the opposite meaning of
“cooling” (*refroidir*) in this recipe \[fol.
[<u>147v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/147v/f/147v/tl)\].
In yet another recipe “for whitening *enilanroc*” (i.e., cornaline, a
red gemstone) under heat, the author-practitioner crossed out “redden”
from the initial phrase “~~redden &~~ ignition” (*“~~rougir~~ & prendre
ignition”*) \[fol.
[<u>12v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/12v/f/12v/tl)\].
This editorial change suggests an original impulse to use “redden &
ignition” as a formulaic expression for heating, regardless of the
optical effect produced by it (which is turning red cornaline white in
this case). Such examples indicate that terms like “redden” and “whiten”
had acquired lives of their own beyond describing literal optical
changes. Rather, *rougir* was decoupled from the visual effect of
turning red to evoke, more broadly, a material transformation induced by
heat in the author-practitioner’s material imaginary.[^8]

The way in which Ms. Fr. 640 uses the language of color is not
explicitly acknowledged in contemporary dictionaries. The *Dictionnaire
du Moyen Français* only defines *rougir* as “to become red” (*“devenir
rouge”*).[^9] Cotgrave’s 1611 French-English dictionary, however, notes
an additional use: “to blush, to grow red.”[^10] An expression similar
to this, “*rougir de honte*” (to blush with shame), can be found in a
French-Latin dictionary from 1606, which alludes to the association
between *rougir* and human bodily transformations.[^11] This link
between the red color and blush can be traced to Galenic and Hippocratic
humoral theory, in which the human body is understood as consisting of
four humoral fluids – black bile, yellow bile, phlegm and blood – each
of which corresponds to a color – black, yellow, white and red. The
body’s exterior complexion is believed to reflect the internal balance
of these humors, with the red color signifying a sanguine temperament,
connected to the movement of “blood” under the influence of the heart’s
vital heat. Blushing, in particular, is conceptualized as the result of
heated blood rushing to the face, stirred by emotions that disrupt the
balance of humoral fluids in the body. Heat and cold would affect this
balance – moderate heat produced red blood and excessive heat yellow
bile, while moderate cold resulted in white phlegm and excessive cold in
black bile.[^12] This understanding of how the colors of the face may
reveal one’s bodily complexion informed the Renaissance artistic taste
for portraits with an even, white complexion, enlivened by red blush on
the cheeks.[^13]

Yet in the early modern context, color was not situated within a
discourse of observation that draws a direct equation between external
appearance and material composition. The humor “blood” (*haima*), which
differs from veinous blood, is a metaphorical reference to hydraulic
processes occurring within the body’s inner world which are not readily
visible to the eye.[^14] Blood, heat, and redness were embedded in a
physiological epistemology that considered the body a constitution of
internal humors, spirits, and habits – but the holistic body amounted to
something more than a mere mechanistic sum of its components.[^15] It
was not until the seventeenth century that vision became a privileged
epistemic approach tied to the notion of so-called scientific
objectivity, which elevated color observations to an authoritative
position in indicating material composition.[^16]

While color was likewise an important epistemic resource for early
modern authors, they tended to consider it an unpredictable
manifestation of complex, often obscured, corporeal changes. The Dutch
physician Levinus Lemnius writes in *Touchstone of Complexions* (1576):
“There is no surer way (sayth *Galene*) certainly to knowe the humours
and juyce in a Creature, then by the colour and outward complexion.” Yet
Lemnius also cautions that complexion has an unstable relationship with
humors, as “\[passions\] make the humours sometyme to resort unto the
skynne & utter parts, and sometime to hyde and conveyghe themselves
farre inwardly.”[^17] Alluding to a similar notion of concealment, blush
was an eroticized trope of the female body in this period, because it
drew the observer’s attention to the hidden, inner workings of the body.
The rush of heated blood to the face drew on the metaphorical imaginary
of bodily heat to evoke ideas about fertility and sexual ripeness.[^18]
In the context of theater, scriptwriters considered blush as something
that was almost impossible to imitate on stage, because it was
notoriously difficult to control the complex emotions causing blood to
run to the face. Applying cosmetics to redden the performer’s face was
thus considered insufficient to imitate the emotions underlying a
genuine blush. As a result, theatrical performances preferred to rely on
dialogue instead of enactment to convey a character’s blush, in order to
avoid the risk of the audience misinterpreting the performer’s
complexion.[^19]

Although artisanal texts like Ms. Fr. 640 offer a different genre of
writing, the author-practitioner’s use of *rougir* echoes this wider
discourse for understanding bodily transformation. Deploying *rougir*
reflected an editorial choice to foreground the transformative power of
heat in the artisanal practice described. The diverse array of materials
that are subject to *rougir* in the manuscript – including mineral
salts, yellow pigments, glass, clay earth, tiles, sand, charcoal,
crayfish and metallic vessels (molds, pots, crucibles and containers) –
share the common condition of appearing in procedures that employ fire.
This is in line with the appearance of *rougir* in the artistic
techniques of Ms. Sloane 2052, a manuscript compiled by Sir Theodore de
Mayerne between 1620 and 1646, in which he uses *rougir* to describe the
transformation of yellow pigments into red when heat is involved.[^20]
Ms. Fr. 640 contains a similar recipe for turning yellow orpiment (a
mineral commonly used as a yellow pigment) into a red pigment, which
uses *rougir* as well \[fol.
[<u>9v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/9v/f/9v/tl)\].
Meanwhile, the manuscript does not use *rougir* to describe working or
painting with red pigments when heat is not involved.

More specifically, the action verb *rougir* elicits a comparison between
the capacity of heat to vitalize the human body and the material “body”
(*corps*). In a set of instructions for heating molds, the
author-practitioner writes: “One needs to *heat* well & evenly *redden*
the molds” \[fol.
[<u>143v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/143v/f/143v/tl)\].
While heating is performed by the artisan, *rougir* is often depicted as
a process enacted by heat. Similar to how vital heat enlivens the body
and reddens the human face, heat was also quite “alive” in material
bodies in Ms. Fr. 640. There are a few times when the
author-practitioner selects the phrase, “it withstands the fire &
reddens” (*“il soubstient le feu & se rougist”*) – employing the
reflexive form or *rougir*, “*se rougir*” – to capture how material
bodies respond to heat by reddening themselves \[fols.
[<u>106v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/106v/f/106v/tl),
[<u>119v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/119v/f/119v/tl)\].
Redness, furthermore, exhibits an almost contagious ability to quickly
spread beyond the artisan’s control, which leads the author-practitioner
to warn the reader that when heating molds, “when \[the mold\] begins to
redden, it is soon red everywhere” \[fol.
[<u>132v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/132v/f/132v/tl)\].
This language dovetails with the broader anthropomorphic discourse of
the *corps* found in the manuscript, which represents colors as being
predisposed to “run,” “die,” become “imbibed,” etc.[^21] The
author-practitioner intentionally crossed out and replaced the term
“pass” (*passer*) with “die down” (*amortir*) when accounting for the
retreat of redness from a hot casting frame \[fol.
[<u>119r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/119r/f/119r/tl)\].
The idea of redness dying corresponds, again, to the humoral notion of
how vital heat dies as a result of external stimuli such as grief.[^22]

Ms. Fr. 640 was not alone in employing this somatic lexicon to
articulate artisanal processes. In his records and observations on
artisanal practices in *Experiments and Considerations Touching Colours*
(1664), Robert Boyle notes a similar use of “sanguine” by artisans to
refer to the reddening of steel under a flame:

> holding it \[steel\] so in the flame of a Candle… you shall after
> a while see that clean end, which is almost contiguous to the flame,
> pass very nimbly from one Colour to another, as from a brighter
> Yellow, to a deeper and reddish Yellow, which Artificers call
> a *sanguine*, and from that to a fainter first, and then a deeper
> Blew.[^23]

The language of reddening allowed artisans to tap into well-established
physiological linkages between heat, blood, the sanguine temperament and
bodily complexion to conceptualize and thus articulate the material
changes they were enacting in material bodies. Beyond the color red, the
author-practitioner draws similar associations between whitening and
cooling through the metaphor of phlegm \[fol.
[<u>147v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/147v/f/147v/tl)\],
as does he associate yellowing with excessive heat, calling to mind the
formation of yellow bile in the body \[fol.
[<u>53v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/53v/f/53v/tl)\].

## Animated Colors as Technical Processes

How, then, does the author-practitioner selectively deploy colors as
verbs vis-à-vis other action verbs (e.g. “heat,” “color,” “gild”)? How
does he determine which materials and processes can be subject to this
language of animated colors? In a recipe for softening iron for
engraving, for example, he only gives instructions to “make it \[iron\]
*reheat* until it is very *red*” (*“le fais* recuire *jusques à ce qu’il
soict bien* rouge*”*) \[fol.
[<u>149r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/149r/f/149r/tl)\].
In contrast, he applies *rougir* generously when he describes the
heating of molds in the manuscript’s impressive collection of metal
casting recipes. The author-practitioner’s choice to limit the use of
*rougir* to certain processes, even while metals like iron exhibit a red
color when heated, suggests that the use of colors as verbs introduces
another dimension of technical details to the material imaginary of Ms.
Fr. 640.

The verb “to color” (*colorer*) is widely used among recipes for
generating color effects on objects in the manuscript, such as
recoloring metalwork \[e.g., fols.
[<u>7r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/7r/f/7r/tl),
[<u>76v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/76v/f/76v/tl)\]
and stones \[e.g., fol.
[<u>100v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/100v/f/100v/tl)–[<u>101r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/101r/f/101r/tl)\]
to imitate precious materials, or transmuting wine as a sleight of hand
trick \[fol.
[<u>43v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/43v/f/43v/tl)\].
In these recipes, *colorer* refers to an optical result which is
applied, often externally, upon an object – such as coating latten and
tinsel stampings in gold or layering gold leaves over stones to make
counterfeit rubies.

More revealingly, the manuscript’s gilding recipes reserve the action,
*colorer*, for a specific step in the gilding process. “First one needs
to wash that which one wants to *gild* in wine lees… & *put down your
colors* on your iron or tin, or other” \[fol.
[<u>76v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/76v/f/76v/tl)\].
While the author-practitioner uses “gild” (*dorer*) to refer to the
holistic recipe, he shifts to the expression of putting down colors when
addressing the procedure that intends to enhance the color of the gilded
item. This is the case in another recipe for gilding on wood as well, as
the recipe was concerned with producing a beautiful gold color on wood:
“If your gold does not have beautiful enough color…” \[fol.
[<u>75v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/75v/f/75v/tl)\].
Indeed, this recipe is followed by another, “for making very beautiful
*color* of gold” \[fol.
[<u>76v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/76v/f/76v/tl)\],
which precisely deals with enhancing the gold *color* of items gilded in
gold foil. In another gilding recipe, the author-practitioner makes a
deliberate choice between “colored” (*coloré*) and “gilded” (*doré*):
“Once you have ~~gilded~~ colored, make your stamping either in tin, as
is said, or in iron ~~dest~~ or copper” \[fol.
[<u>7r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/7r/f/7r/tl)\].
As the title of this entry – “for *gilding* with *gold* *color* and
tinsel” – suggests, it foregrounds, again, the production of a gold
color effect. Therefore, this recipe addresses how to create a gold
effect after one has gilded with tinsel: “And if you have *gilded* with
tinsel, *color* it with smoke of partridge or of yellow or red cloth, &
it will be beautiful like fine gold.”

In contrast, the author-practitioner uses “guild” (*dorer*) to
foreground a different procedural focus. In a recipe “for molding hollow
and very delicately in fine gold, *dorer* appears in the context of
discussing the thickness and uniformity of the gilding:

> Next, *gild* \[*dorer*\] it with fine gold, as uniform as it will be
> possible for you, three or four or five times, & until your gold has
> the thickness of a piece of paper or something similar, & all the
> scales will always show equally. \[fol.
> [<u>119v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/119v/f/119v/tl)\]

Another recipe for “very light and hollow work of gold” uses *dorer* to
draw attention to a similar matter of thickness:

> Next, *gild* \[*dorer*\] it lightly. And once the first gilding is
> done & dried by fire, brighten, rub with a scratch-brush, & make
> another layer of light gilding like the first time, & do thus three or
> four times or more, according to the thickness you want to give.
> \[fol.
> [<u>156r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/156r/f/156r/tl)\]

Thus, while recipes targeting color results employ *colorer*, others,
which focus on the thickness, evenness or consistency – or in other
words, the “body” (*corps*) – of the material adopt *dorer*
instead.[^24]

The implications of *colorer* are furthermore differentiated from the
verb of each individual color. Notably, gilding recipes refer to the
yellow or gold color only as a noun, such as: “you will put down a layer
of *yellow gold* \[*d’ore jaulne*\]” \[fol.
[<u>75v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/75v/f/75v/tl)\].
The verb “to yellow” (*jaulnir*), in contrast, only appears in the
context of unwanted color corruption, associated with oil and,
occasionally, also heat. *Jaulnir* is thus most common in varnishing
recipes:

> Thus you will give it \[turpentine oil\] whatever body you want. It
> could be made well without fire, but, when heated, it is more
> desiccative. It is appropriate for panel paintings and other painted
> things without corrupting the colors or *yellowing* \[*jaulnir*\].
> \[fol.
> [<u>3r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/3r/f/3r/tl);
> see also
> [<u>4r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/4r/f/4r/tl),
> [<u>47r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/47r/f/47r/tl),
> [<u>97v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/97v/f/97v/tl)\]

In contrast, when a yellow color is the intended outcome of the recipe,
the author-practitioner refrains from using *jaulnir* and instead
retains the noun, as seen in recipes “for bronzing in yellow and white”
(*pour bronser de blanc et jaulne*) \[fol.
[<u>5v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/5v/f/5v/tl)\],
or, “for making yellow varnish” (*pour faire vernys jaulne*) \[fol.
[<u>74v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/74v/f/74v/tl)\].
The verb is also borrowed by counter-proofing and painting recipes to
refer to undesired yellowing effects \[fols.
[<u>51r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/51r/f/51r/tl),
[<u>57v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/57v/f/57v/tl)–[<u>58r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/58r/f/58r/tl)\].
Although the yellowing does not necessarily occur as a result of oil use
in these recipes, oil is nonetheless present as an ingredient. In
another entry on raising silkworms, the author-practitioner writes about
the color of silk: “Some worms make it whiter, others more *yellowish
\[jaunastre\]*. And even if it may be white, *it yellows \[elle se
jaulnist\]* when one draws it with hot water” \[fol.
[<u>53v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/53v/f/53v/tl)\].
While using the adjectival “yellowish” (*jaunastre*) to describe the
color given by silkworms, he chooses the reflexive verb “*se jaunir*” to
differentiate the color transformation that occurs in silk under heat.
The author-practitioner’s use of *jaulnir* at the intersection of oil
and heat calls to mind the production of the choleric humor, yellow
bile, under excessive heat.

The author-practitioner applies *rougir* to a different, but equally
specific set of processes. First, *rougir* refers to the ability of a
material to resist transformation when subjected to heat, which is an
important property in molds. The author-practitioner ascribes the
ability to “withstand the fire,” at varying degrees, to plaster, feather
alum, spat, and rust \[fols.
[<u>106v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/106v/f/106v/tl),
[<u>107r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/107r/f/107r/tl),
[<u>119v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/119v/f/119v/tl),
[<u>132v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/132v/f/132v/tl)\].
According to him, such materials were resistant to burning, cracking and
corrupting in fire: “it withstands the fire & *reddens* \[*se rougist*\]
whenever need be, without corrupting” \[fol.
[<u>119v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/119v/f/119v/tl)\].
He also characterizes materials like feather alum as being able to
bestow these fire-resisting properties upon other materials like sand,
which thereby allows sand to be used for making molds as well:

> There can never be too much feather alum, for this is what gives bond
> to the sand, and because it does not burn, it makes sand withstand the
> fire without cracking & bursting. Otherwise, without it, the sand
> would not withstand it. \[fol.
> [<u>107r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/107r/f/107r/tl)\]

In other words, *rougir* (or *se rougir*) embodies a material’s response
to the transformation that heat attempts to enact upon it – it
counteracts heat by reddening itself, and then reverts back to its
original complexion when redness “dies down.”

In addition, the ability to perform *rougir* under fire without being
altered itself, renders the material a suitable vessel of fire’s
transformative power. According to the author-practitioner, *crocum
ferri* (rusted metal filings) can allow sand to be used in casting
metals, because it acquires heat from fire and then “receives it
\[sand\] & holds it within its warmth” \[fol.
[<u>106v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/106v/f/106v/tl)\].
Many recipes advise the use of reddened shovels, iron blades and plates
to store and disseminate heat over a long period: “Put under your
crucible a thick iron slab, which *will redden* \[*rougira*\] & will
maintain the heat under your crucible” \[fol.
[<u>82v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/82v/f/82v/tl);
see also
[<u>92v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/92v/f/92v/tl),
[<u>110v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/110v/f/110v/tl),
[<u>151v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/151v/f/151v/tl),
[<u>161v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/161v/f/161v/tl)\].
Charcoal reddens under heat and can be used to subsequently redden
casting frames \[fol.
[<u>132r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/132r/f/132r/tl)\].
Iron filings, when reddened in fire, may furthermore acquire the
abilities of fire, and subsequently become capable of burning away
impurities in themselves: “Because usually filings are mixed with filth,
it is good *to redden them* \[*la rougir*\] in the fire to burn the
impurities and then wash them in clear water” \[fol.
[<u>143v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/143v/f/143v/tl)\].

The grammatical play on color terminology provides the
author-practitioner with the linguistic tools to differentiate between
the different uses of a given material in a recipe. Only the noun
*rouge*, and not the verb *rougir*, is used in the aforementioned recipe
for softening iron, because the act of heating intends to transform the
iron, such that it may be “very soft for engraving on it well whatever
you want” \[fol.
[<u>149r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/149r/f/149r/tl)\].
However, the author-practitioner applies *rougir* when iron, in the form
of an iron slab, is not the intended object of transformation, but is
functioning as a mediator of heat in the other recipe for casting in
bronze \[fol.
[<u>82v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/82v/f/82v/tl)\].
In a different context of making iron filings rust, he writes:

> That which is rusty by itself, being showered with salt water or
> vinegar or urine and then <sup>very</sup> dried out <sup>*and*
> *reddened in the fire*</sup>, is very *red* ground on porphyry and is
> of the color of Levant bole, & approaching minium. \[fol.
> [<u>163v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/163v/f/163v/tl)\]

He adds “and reddened in the fire” (“*et rougy au feu*”) as an
afterthought in the margin to refer to the step of heating iron filings
to remove its impurities, while the following noun “red” (*rouge*)
refers to the process of rusting. By employing verbs like *rougir* and
*jaulnir* to describe artisanal procedures, the author-practitioner
directs the reader’s attention towards the relative function materials
perform in the artisanal process at hand. The possibility of rendering
colors into verbs to spotlight process and relative application, over
intrinsic properties or observational outcomes, offers a hint of the
rich linguistic resources that were available to the sixteenth-century
artisan.

Whether *rougir*, *jaulner*, *colorer* or *dorer*, the verbs in the
author-practitioner’s lexicon allowed him to convey an impressive level
of technical detail in the written word. Thus, artisanal practices were
far from ineffable – it is only that the subtleties of the artisanal
lexicon easily escape the attention of the general reader, just as these
usages do not make their way into contemporary popular dictionaries.
This suggests that specialized semantic fields existed and were possibly
transmitted alongside fields of artisanal knowledge. Although these
verbs may indeed be “polysemic concepts” – as Jenny Boulboullé and
Maartje Stols-Witlox have found with the term “*corps*” – in that their
diverse applications could not be sufficiently captured by a single
definition, yet each verb does, nonetheless, carry a specified set of
technical and tacit instructions.[^25]

## The Role of Color in the Construction of Material Networks

In addition to these specialized technical applications of *rougir*, it
also leaves a more ambiguous trail through the manuscript. The
author-practitioner projects this term beyond metalwork recipes and onto
a few seemingly outlying contexts, including Cardona salt, which is used
to make “very good vinegar” \[fol.
[<u>40r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/40r/f/40r/tl)\],
and crayfish, to make it seem boiled when it is still alive \[fol.
[<u>130r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/130r/f/130r/tl)\].
Tracing how the author-practitioner transplants color terminology out of
its usual context, can further complicate the way in which we may be
inclined to categorize the domains of craft and knowledge in Ms. Fr.
640.[^26]

Rusting is an interesting process to consider at the intersection
between *rougir* and the color red. The production of *crocum ferri* –
by making iron filings rust with vinegar and heat – involves both
performing *rougir* in the author-practitioner’s conventional sense
(i.e., heating iron filings to burn away the impurities in it) and the
creation of an optical result of redness (“*rougeur*”) from rust \[fol.
[<u>161v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/161v/f/161v/tl)\].
As the humor blood was classified as wet and hot and was associated with
the element air, vinegar, considered dry and cold, was a common fumigant
used to counteract threatening airborne forces generated by blood.[^27]
Yet in Ms. Fr. 640, the author-practitioner counterintuitively
associates both redness and reddening with the formation of vinegar,
writing that “very good vinegar” is made by making Cardona salt “redden”
(*“faisant rougir”*) in heat, before “throwing it all red or quite hot
into wine” \[fol.
[<u>40r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/40r/f/40r/tl)\].[^28]
As vinegar functions in Ms. Fr. 640 as an important agent in generating
redness (i.e., rust) on metals, the author-practitioner reassigns this
material to the linguistic sphere of generating, instead of
counteracting, redness. He mobilizes the language of redness to
emphasize the chain of interrelations between vinegar, rust, and metal
casting. While drawing on established systems of physiological knowledge
that surely resonated with himself and his audience, he is not confined
by its metaphorical parameters. His use of the color red did not adhere
strictly to either humoral theory or optical observation, but was
conditioned by his familiarity with the material process.

The author-practitioner introduces his reader to a material imaginary in
which the connections between metals, fire, rust, vinegar, wine and
crayfish were forged around the color red. According to him, the
powerful transformative force of the red color that generates “very good
vinegar” feeds into the rust of *crocum ferri*, which thereby enhances
the ability of the mold produced from it to redden and withstand fire
during the casting process. Therefore, the author-practitioner states
that, “The one \[mold\] of steel fillings & needles is redder & better”
\[fol.
[<u>132v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/132v/f/132v/tl)\].
In this statement, he conveys a material imaginary in which strength is
associated with the intensity of the red color – this understanding of
strength could be projected over the materials and processes described
here, because of the networks that linked them across the dimension of
color.

The manuscript includes an odd recipe “for reddening \[*rougir*\] live
crayfish, which will seem boiled”: “Rub them in quite good vinegar in
which there should be a little eau-de-vie & hardly any, & they can be
served as cooked & will move around” \[fol.
[<u>130r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/130r/f/130r/tl)\].
In light of the function of colors as the pivots of material networks in
Ms. Fr. 640, the relevance of this recipe to the manuscript’s scope
becomes clearer. The instruction to rub crayfish “in quite good vinegar”
recalls the previous recipe on vinegar, tapping into the material
imaginary of the red color to conjure connections to the cooking of food
in the human stomach, the process which gives rise to blood. According
to the author-practitioner’s understanding, the effectiveness of this
recipe at imitating the “cooking” process in the human body seems to
justify its ability to deceive. Revealingly, he applies the term
*rougir* to this recipe, which involves neither heat nor metals. Yet the
reddening of crayfish by vinegar draws a wealth of connections to the
metal casting process; and indeed, the manuscript includes many recipes
for casting crayfish to experiment with nature’s transformations \[e.g.
fol.
[<u>141r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/141r/f/141r/tl)–[<u>142r</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/folios/142r/f/142r/tl)\].[^29]
The use of colors in the active form serves as a powerful thread weaving
together the scattered pages of the manuscript. It allows the
author-practitioner to map the interrelationships between materials,
extrapolating from familiar characteristics and processes to more
effectively communicate his material imaginary to the reader.

## Conclusion

The author-practitioner of Ms. Fr. 640 may sometimes use the language of
color as a lens to sharpen his account of procedural technicalities in
writing. At other times, this language performs an opposite role,
conceptually stretching and integrating discrete recipes into an
abstract material imaginary that is anchored in colors. Color offers a
convenient epistemological platform, on which the author-practitioner’s
complex perceptions of visual and material change converged and could be
organized into a systematic way of conceptualizing and transmitting
artisanal knowledge in the workshop and beyond.

Within the semantic world of the manuscript, verbs, which were derived
from colors, serve to foreground artisanal processes. In other words,
actions like *rougir* or *jaulnir* are not intrinsically attached to any
agent, human or non-human, nor any predetermined visual or material
outcome. The very nature of the artisanal process cuts across such
distinctions. Instead, these verbs allude to the forces of
transformation that are associated with its color, whether that be the
power of fire to animate the body, or that of oil and excessive heat to
corrupt it. The author-practitioner could flexibly mobilize these
formulas of transformation to convey his own desired instructions.

## Bibliography

Arikha, Noga. *Passions and Tempers: A History of the Humours*. 1st ed.
New York, NY: Ecco, 2007.

Baker, Tawrin, Sven Dupré, Sachiko Kusukawa, and Karin Leonhard, eds.
*Early Modern Color Worlds*. Leiden: Brill, 2015.
[<u>https://brill.com/view/title/33093</u>](https://brill.com/view/title/33093).

Boulboullé, Jenny, and Maartje Stols-Witlox. “Working (with)
the *Corps*: The Body of Sands, Colors, and Varnishes in Ms. Fr. 640.”
In *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital
Critical Edition and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, edited by
Making and Knowing Project, Pamela H. Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna
Helena Uchacz, Tillmann Taape, Clément Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny
Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna Bilak, Marc Smith, and Terry Catapano. New
York: Making and Knowing Project,
2020. [<u>https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_307_ie_19</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_307_ie_19).

Boyle, Robert. *Experiments and Considerations Touching Colours First
Occasionally Written, among Some Other Essays to a Friend, and Now
Suffer’d to Come Abroad as the Beginning of an Experimental History of
Colours*. London, 1664.

Cotgrave, Randle. *A Dictionarie of the French and English Tongues*.
London: Adam Islip, 1611. http://www.pbm.com/~lindahl/cotgrave/.

Daston, Lorraine, and Elizabeth Lunbeck, eds. *Histories of Scientific
Observation*. Chicago ; London: The University of Chicago Press, 2011.

*Dictionnaire Du Moyen Français (1330-1500)*. Version 2023. ATILF - CNRS
& Université de Lorraine.
[<u>http://zeus.atilf.fr/dmf/</u>](http://zeus.atilf.fr/dmf/).

Ingold, Tim. *The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood,
Dwelling and Skill*. 1st ed. London: Routledge, 2021.
[<u>https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003196662</u>](https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003196662).

Kirby, Jo, and Marika Spring. “Ms. Fr. 640 in the World of Pigments in
Sixteenth-Century Europe.” In *Secrets of Craft and Nature in
Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition and English Translation
of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, edited by Making and Knowing Project, Pamela H.
Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna Helena Uchacz, Tillmann Taape, Clément
Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna Bilak, Marc
Smith, and Terry Catapano. New York: Making and Knowing Project,
2020. [<u>https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_321_ie_19</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_321_ie_19).

Lemnius, Levinus. *The Touchstone of Complexions. Generallye Appliable,
Expedient and Profitable for All Such, as Be Desirous & Carefull of
Their Bodylye Health.* Translated by Thomas Newton. London, 1576.

Lindemann, Mary. *Medicine and Society in Early Modern Europe*. New
Approaches to European History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1999.

Mayerne, Théodore Turquet de. *Sir Theodore de Mayerne, Pictoria,
Sculptoria et Quae Subalternarum Artium*. British Library Digitised
Manuscripts, Sloane Ms. 2052, 1620.
[<u>https://artechne.hum.uu.nl/node/94995</u>](https://artechne.hum.uu.nl/node/94995).

Ndungu, Njeri. “What is *Or Mat* in Ms. Fr. 640?” In *Secrets of Craft
and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition and English
Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, edited by Making and Knowing Project,
Pamela H. Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna Helena Uchacz, Tillmann Taape,
Clément Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna
Bilak, Marc Smith, and Terry Catapano. New York: Making and Knowing
Project,
2020. [<u>https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_041_sp_16</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_041_sp_16).

Ranconnet, Aimar de, Hadrianus Junius, and Jean Masset. *Thresor de La
Langue Francoyse Tant Ancienne Que Moderne*. Paris: David Douceur, 1606.
[<u>https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k50808z</u>](https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k50808z).

Sammern, Romana. “Red, White and Black: Colors of Beauty, Tints of
Health and Cosmetic Materials in Early Modern English Art Writing.” In
*Early Modern Color Worlds*, edited by Tawrin Baker, Sven Dupré, Sachiko
Kusukawa, and Karin Leonhard. Leiden: Brill, 2015.
[<u>https://brill.com/view/title/33093</u>](https://brill.com/view/title/33093).

Smith, Pamela H. *From Lived Experience to the Written Word:
Reconstructing Practical Knowledge in the Early Modern World*. Chicago;
London: The University of Chicago Press, 2022.
[<u>https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226818238.001</u>](https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226818238.001).

Smith, Pamela H. “Lifecasting in Ms. Fr. 640.” In *Secrets of Craft and
Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition and English
Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, edited by Making and Knowing Project,
Pamela H. Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna Helena Uchacz, Tillmann Taape,
Clément Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna
Bilak, Marc Smith, and Terry Catapano. New York: Making and Knowing
Project,
2020. [<u>https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_511_ad_20</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_511_ad_20).

Sparey, Victoria. “Performing Puberty: Fertile Complexions in
Shakespeare’s Plays.” *Shakespeare Bulletin* 33, no. 3 (September 2015):
441–67.
[<u>https://doi.org/10.1353/shb.2015.0041</u>](https://doi.org/10.1353/shb.2015.0041).

The Making and Knowing Project. “Entry Categories.” In *Secrets of Craft
and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition and English
Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, edited by Making and Knowing Project,
Pamela H. Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna Helena Uchacz, Tillmann Taape,
Clément Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna
Bilak, Marc Smith, and Terry Catapano. New York: Making and Knowing
Project, 2020.
[<u>https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/content/resources</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/content/resources).

[^1]: There are multiple hands in Ms. Fr. 640; by “author-practitioner,”
    I am referring to the main hand in which 95% of the manuscript is
    written.

[^2]: Ms. Fr. 640 demonstrates a greater interest in the decorative
    crafts than other comparable manuscripts. Jo Kirby and Marika
    Spring, “Ms. Fr. 640 in the World of Pigments in Sixteenth-Century
    Europe,” in *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A
    Digital Critical Edition and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr.
    640*, ed. Making and Knowing Project, et al. (New York: Making and
    Knowing Project,
    2020), [<u>https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_321_ie_19</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_321_ie_19).

[^3]: Tawrin Baker et al., eds., *Early Modern Color Worlds* (Leiden:
    Brill, 2015), 3, 14,
    [<u>https://brill.com/view/title/33093</u>](https://brill.com/view/title/33093).

[^4]: Njeri Ndungu, “What Is Or Mat in Ms. Fr. 640?,” in *Secrets of
    Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition
    and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, ed. Making and Knowing
    Project, et al. (New York: Making and Knowing Project, 2020),
    [<u>https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_041_sp_16</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_041_sp_16).

[^5]: Jenny Boulboullé and Maartje Stols-Witlox, “Working (with) the
    Corps: The Body of Sands, Colors, and Varnishes in Ms. Fr. 640,”
    in *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital
    Critical Edition and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, ed.
    Making and Knowing Project, et al. (New York: Making and Knowing
    Project, 2020),
    [<u>https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_307_ie_19</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_307_ie_19).

[^6]: Pamela H. Smith, *From Lived Experience to the Written Word:
    Reconstructing Practical Knowledge in the Early Modern World*
    (Chicago; London: The University of Chicago Press, 2022), 226,
    [<u>https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226818238.001</u>](https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226818238.001).

[^7]: Tim Ingold, *The Perception of the Environment: Essays on
    Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill*, 1st ed. (London: Routledge, 2021),
    426–29,
    [<u>https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003196662</u>](https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003196662).

[^8]: I borrow the phrase “material imaginary” from Smith, *From Lived
    Experience to the Written Word*, 41, referring to a worldview in
    which materials generate meaning through their use.

[^9]: *Dictionnaire Du Moyen Français (1330-1500)*, Version 2023
    (ATILF - CNRS & Université de Lorraine),
    [<u>http://zeus.atilf.fr/dmf/</u>](http://zeus.atilf.fr/dmf/).

[^10]: Randle Cotgrave, *A Dictionarie of the French and English
    Tongues* (London: Adam Islip, 1611),
    [<u>http://www.pbm.com/~lindahl/cotgrave</u>](http://www.pbm.com/~lindahl/cotgrave).

[^11]: Aimar de Ranconnet, Hadrianus Junius, and Jean Masset, *Thresor
    de La Langue Francoyse Tant Ancienne Que Moderne* (Paris: David
    Douceur, 1606), 574,
    [<u>https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k50808z</u>](https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k50808z).

[^12]: Noga Arikha, *Passions and Tempers: A History of the Humours*,
    1st ed (New York, NY: Ecco, 2007), 67, 216; Mary Lindemann,
    *Medicine and Society in Early Modern Europe*, New Approaches to
    European History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999),
    15–17.

[^13]: Romana Sammern, “Red, White and Black: Colors of Beauty, Tints of
    Health and Cosmetic Materials in Early Modern English Art Writing,”
    in *Early Modern Color Worlds*, ed. Tawrin Baker et al. (Leiden:
    Brill, 2015), 122,
    [<u>https://brill.com/view/title/33093</u>](https://brill.com/view/title/33093).

[^14]: Arikha, *Passions and Tempers*, 10.

[^15]: Lindemann, *Medicine and Society in Early Modern Europe*, 15–17.

[^16]: Lorraine Daston and Elizabeth Lunbeck, eds., *Histories of
    Scientific Observation* (Chicago ; London: The University of Chicago
    Press, 2011); Baker et al., *Early Modern Color Worlds*, 1–3.

[^17]: Levinus Lemnius, *The Touchstone of Complexions. Generallye
    Appliable, Expedient and Profitable for All Such, as Be Desirous &
    Carefull of Their Bodylye Health.*, trans. Thomas Newton (London,
    1576), 90.

[^18]: Victoria Sparey, “Performing Puberty: Fertile Complexions in
    Shakespeare’s Plays,” *Shakespeare Bulletin* 33, no. 3 (September
    2015): 45,
    [<u>https://doi.org/10.1353/shb.2015.0041</u>](https://doi.org/10.1353/shb.2015.0041).

[^19]: Sparey, 461.

[^20]: Théodore Turquet de Mayerne, *Sir Theodore de Mayerne, Pictoria,
    Sculptoria et Quae Subalternarum Artium*, British Library Digitised
    Manuscripts, Sloane Ms. 2052, 1620, fols. 92r, 111r, 122r, 161v,
    [<u>https://artechne.hum.uu.nl/node/94995</u>](https://artechne.hum.uu.nl/node/94995).

[^21]: See Boulboullé and Stols-Witlox, “Working (with) the Corps.”

[^22]: Arikha, *Passions and Tempers*, 58.

[^23]: Emphasis mine. Robert Boyle, *Experiments and Considerations
    Touching Colours First Occasionally Written, among Some Other Essays
    to a Friend, and Now Suffer’d to Come Abroad as the Beginning of an
    Experimental History of Colours* (London, 1664), 7–8.

[^24]: For more on what is the “body” (corps) of colors, see Boulboullé
    and Stols-Witlox, “Working (with) the Corps.”

[^25]: Boulboullé and Stols-Witlox.

[^26]: See The Making and Knowing Project, “Entry Categories,”
    in *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital
    Critical Edition and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, ed.
    Making and Knowing Project, et al. (New York: Making and Knowing
    Project, 2020),
    [<u>https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/content/resources</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/content/resources).

[^27]: Lindemann, *Medicine and Society in Early Modern Europe*, 64.

[^28]: The Digital Edition translates “*faisant rougir*” as “heating
    red-hot,” but it is important to note that this is a causative
    construction with the verb *rougir*, which translates literally as,
    “making redden.”

[^29]: Pamela H. Smith, “Lifecasting in Ms. Fr. 640,” in *Secrets of
    Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition
    and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, ed. Making and Knowing
    Project, et al. (New York: Making and Knowing Project,
    2020),[<u> https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_511_ad_20</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_511_ad_20).
