---
title: "Making and Knowing Syllabi"
draft: false
weight: 10
---
The Making and Knowing Project began teaching courses that integrated hands-on activities in 2014. In the course *Craft and Science: Making Objects in the Early Modern World*&mdash;taught 2014-18&mdash;graduate students conducted text-, object-, and laboratory-based research that resulted in the edition's approximately 130 [essays](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays) which interpret, contextualize, and reconstruct the content of Ms. Fr. 640. The Companion contains syllabi for each of the eight versions of _Craft and Science_, focused each year on a different theme: Moldmaking and Metalworking; Colormaking (including dyes, pigments, artificial gems, coloring woods and metals, and varnish making); Practical Knowledge: Vernacular Natural History, Practical Perspective, Optics, Mechanics, and Medicine; Ephemeral Art; and Printmaking, Inscription, and Impression. We hope these syllabi will be a source of inspiration and provide a practical guide in the complexities of integrating seminar discussion and critical anaylsys with hands-on work in the laboratory or studio. In teaching these hands-on research seminars, we tried to balance about 8 weeks of hands-on skill building with 8 weeks of individual (or group) research and writing. During the weeks of skill building, we brought in for short periods "expert makers" (whose essays are also included in the edition) whose practice focused around the year's theme. Their essays reflect upon some of the ways we all learned together during these skill building sessions. As for the student essays, We came only gradually to a form of writing by which we could combine argument driven historical writing with descriptions of the laboratory making and reconstruction processes. In this, the students' hybrid [lab/field notes](https://fieldnotes.makingandknowing.org) were essential, and much time and effort went into recording and formatting these notes. The resulting essays, then, encapsulate much of the learning and many of the dynamics of the work of combining hands-on with critical analysis, which we hope will be useful to others in creating their own courses and research projects. For more information on this course, see [Making the Edition of Ms. Fr. 640](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_329_ie_19).

With the edition complete, we transitioned in 2021 to a new mixed graduate and undergraduate course, *Making and Knowing in Early Modern Europe: Hands-On History*, in which students explore *Secrets of Craft and Nature* to create projects&mdash;involving all kinds of research&mdash;that extend the content of the edition in creative and sometimes surprising ways. The duration of the course period for this class is only about 2 hours/week (in contrast to the 4 hours of _Craft and Science_). This presents a serious challenge to hands-on work in the classroom, and it was out of this need to streamline the hands-on work that our [Lesson Plans]({{<ref "activity-sheets" >}}) emerged. As you can see from the syllabi for this course, the hands-on sessions incorporate many of the skill building activities of _Craft and Science_. The Lesson Plans and associated teaching resources included in the Companion provide step-by-step guidance in planning, tools and ingredients, and the processes of the hands-on work. These lesson plans have been used by instructors from high school to graduate courses, and their experiences and advice can be found in [Using M&K Resources]({{<ref "case-studies" >}}).

During development of the edition, we taught digital humanities courses that integrated methods and tools of digital scholarship in which the students helped to prototype the edition. The syllabi for these courses provide information about minimal computing and the open access technology that underlie the edition and our digital publication tool, *EditionCrafter*. The student projects resulting from these courses are included in this Companion, under [Digital Fr. 640]({{<ref "digital" >}}), and on the Project's [Sandbox](https://cu-mkp.github.io/sandbox/), where digital projects using the data of the edition are collected.

All these syllabi are provided for inspiration, to suggest possible readings and discussion prompts, and model the integration of hands-on activities with substantive discussion of relevant texts. [Essays](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays) from the edition can be used as course readings and describe possible reconstruction activities, while [Student Projects]({{< "project >}}) from Hands-On History courses can be consulted by instructors and students for inspiration and to consider the many ways to engage with Ms. Fr. 640 and its digital edition.

## HIST GR8906: Craft and Science: Making Objects in the Early Modern World

Columbia University, History Department, graduate-level "Lab Seminar"

This Lab Seminar course studies the materials, techniques, settings, and meanings of skilled craft and artistic practices in the early modern period (1350-1750), in order to reflect upon a series of issues, including craft knowledge and artisanal epistemology; the intersections between craft and science; and questions of historical methodology and evidence in the reconstruction of historical experience. The course was run as a “Laboratory Seminar,” with discussions of primary and secondary materials, as well as text- and object-based research and hands-on work in a laboratory. This course contributed to the collective production of the digital critical edition of a late sixteenth-century manuscript, BnF Ms. Fr. 640. Final essays in this course were workshopped and readied for publication as the [Research Essays of *Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France*](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays). 

The course was offered from 2014-18, guided by a different theme each year to help focus research on related techniques described in the manuscript:
- Moldmaking and Metalworking (e.g., portrait medal casting, sand casting, and box molding)
     - [Fall 2014 HIST GR8906: Moldmaking and Metalworking Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vT7See-Ba9a_RleKzJF65ucAyQBOHyanuXDYTtQ4CIVGQmCHaWpULYhvyOiFUUUyH6lDokCQOtwJ907/pub)
     - [Spring 2015 HIST GR8906: Moldmaking and Metalworking Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQBhcm7nzcjq-fnpeu2FNVSFvr7dye6jf1YE_ORgu6RLc-Suk-C36Qvvk2BAMo6BXXpO63OpG_ZYhLs/pub)
- Colormaking (including dyes, pigments, artificial gems, coloring woods and metals, and varnish making)
     - [Fall 2015 HIST GR8906: Colormaking Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vR77RXxNNfNA4lyT4c9s1VMgEpqo4oM_xAv8nrUi4TBqwSE3wOE96I3CnxmXUhGXgvDI9_zc9fDGwGe/pub)
     - [Spring 2016 HIST GR8906: Colormaking Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQ3yUhTLMGkUYU2VH-kczSWOegBvhAKYUr69oF1UK6beqIOkJ-VMFnRmD0D3ib6Oh6U6Cc5kAhVpCmb/pub)
- Practical Knowledge: Vernacular Natural History, Practical Perspective, Optics, Mechanics, and Medicine
     - [Fall 2016 HIST GR8906: Practical Knowledge Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vTzLSf_qzMiLKAr4ay8vKzBAHjjZaetENhK-ITmg18rblEbal7hfuUXpUKgFt9NtLW8W29g9KuIX8_8/pub)
     - [Spring 2017 HIST GR8906: Practical Knowledge Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vTfqF4UNMaSLjX-FmXA6vOz6calSfPMMUfGaUpw8CjcUFcBtXXj7b1XLOOSHMVKUDljAcXGzDSCrevx/pub)
- Ephemeral Art (such as the creation of artworks that were intended to stand outside (like banners) or that aimed to create the visual effect of a more permanent (and expensive) work of art)
     - [Fall 2017 HIST GR8906: Ephemeral Art Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vRvNiZIaubDG_Cb1F8KOF8gV0sFBiGr01W3iXmDJV3yTFgeGp1teBwg2MkwUZ4TCGRglJ6Y1bK3XUMv/pub)
- Printmaking, Inscription and Impression
     - [Fall 2018 HIST GR8906: Impression Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQoa_ox8PAc99ebdx4wxFPULy7aLHSJIyltikSRo7CsNocqS8EfIfCCl9qDIUpaxn0iqsfdmjg9lbpX/pub)

## HIST GU4962: Making and Knowing in Early Modern Europe: Hands-On History

Columbia University, History Department, advanced undergraduate- / intro graduate-level "Lab Seminar"

This Laboratory Seminar is a re-working of the graduate-level *GR8906: Craft and Science*, tailored to advanced undergradute and graduate students. This course introduces students to the materials, techniques, contexts, and meanings of skilled craft and artistic practices in early modern Europe (1350-1750). The course will be run as a “Laboratory Seminar,” with discussions of primary and secondary materials, as well as hands-on work in the M&K laboratory. This course tests the use of [*Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical Edition and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/) in a higher education classroom to inform the development of the Making and Knowing Project's Research and Teaching Companion. Students’ final projects (exploratory and experimental work in the form of digital/textual analysis of Ms. Fr. 640, reconstruction insight reports, videos for the Companion, or a combination) will be published as part of the Companion or the Sandbox.
- [Summer 2021 HIST GU4962: Hands-on History Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vTdDTbjg3Wo-03RCA7KtszFF-nVyY0ECotExiQK8SnNpBQ_zNC0tBv9f_RUCujxGlTkdFTZiGicbVKO/pub) (NOTE: this was a six-week intensive course, instructed virtually)
- [Fall 2021 HIST GU4962: Hands-on History Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vSwHOvl3vKELpALapOMMPWTRYaTkVxSn6n9243mOpekLYzlzpIbpmjzZjaRcFnj_RCi3iwNKSm5qBHS/pub)
- Spring 2022 HIST GU4962: Hands-on History Syllabus (TBD)
- [Spring 2023 HIST GU4962: Hands-on History Syllabus]({{<ref "syllabus_sp23_gu4962-hands-on-history" >}})

## HIST GR8975: What is a Book in the 21st Century? Working with Historical Texts in a Digital Environment

Columbia University, History Department, graduate-level "Digital Seminar"

Using the English translation of Ms. Fr. 640 as the basic data set, students collaboratively created a minimal (i.e., limited, basic feature) digital edition by the end of the semester, effectively prototyping a design for the Project’s final digital critical edition. Additionally, the course introduced students both theoretically and practically to the concepts and tools relevant to the creation of a digital edition, such as image and text capture; metadata, tracking, and data management; data curation; transformations to, representations of, and interfaces of digital resources; and archiving, licensing, persistence, and re-usability. The seminar thus equipped participating students with identifiable, measurable, and repurposable digital skills while furthering the Project goals.
- [Spring 2017: What is a Book? Syllabus](https://www.makingandknowing.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Website-Syllabus_Digital_course.pdf)
- The students' resulting [Minimal digital edition of the working English translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640](https://cu-mkp.github.io/GR8975-edition/)
- See the [Course Github Repository](https://github.com/cu-mkp/GR8975)
- In collaboration with Columbia's Center for Teaching and Learning, this course also resulted in the creation of the [Digital Literacy Competency Calculator (DLCC)](https://ccnmtl.github.io/digital-literacy/), a web-based tool for representing the connection between digital literacy competencies and the teaching and learning practices that produce them. See also the [“White Paper: Digital Literacy Competency Calculator: Rationale and Process”](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11Em2vX-jJw_4QoP62STwVo1i5cNi81ARft9j7gOQsoA/edit?usp=sharing) and the [DLCC for Spring 2017: What is a Book?](https://cu-mkp.github.io/diglit-gr8975/).

## ENGL84031 / HISTGU4031 / COMS4495: Transforming Texts: Textual Analysis, Literary Modeling, and Visualization

Columbia University, cross-listed in the Departments of English, History, and Computer Science, advanced undergraduate- / intro graduate-level "Digital Seminar"

Designed for graduate and advanced undergraduate students in the social sciences, humanities, and computer science, this Spring 2019 hybrid course was situated at the crossroads of historical exploration and computer sciences. Students were exposed to digital literacy tools and computational skills through the lens of the Making and Knowing Project. This course built off the [Spring 2017: What is a Book?](https://www.makingandknowing.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Website-Syllabus_Digital_course.pdf) course described above. For the final project, students collaborated to investigate linguistic features of Ms. Fr. 640 using natural language processing and text mining techniques. These projects shed light on topics of interest within the manuscript and uncover connections within the textual data.
- [Spring 2019: Transforming Texts Syllabus](https://docs.google.com/document/d/e/2PACX-1vQPLMeJc5B32slPAKIv-4W29hj_G6WR7dVQ7TTbYA7oStHv-Ze7BP5BUkQhUvFgXGXGlylSL6BsL2jT/pub)
