---
title: "Reflections on Hands-On"
draft: false
weight: 40
---

# Reflections on Hands-on Teaching and Learning 
Since 2014, the Making and Knowing Project (M&K) at Columbia University has been teaching hands-on history of art and science as a way to engage with and investigate an unusual historical text, BnF Ms. Fr. 640. This compilation of artisanal recipes, technical notes, and observations about daily life in Renaissance France is a rich historical source, but it is a text that is better enacted than read from start to finish. Through low-stakes making activities and project-based learning, M&K students have learned to interpret historical texts—and history itself—through material experiments. Led by a historian of science with team members from the sciences and humanities, M&K integrates laboratory and archival research to cross the science/humanities divide, exploring intersections between artistic making and scientific knowing. 

Today, artistic making and scientific knowing are seen as separate realms, yet the sciences’ empiricism and observation originated in the creative labors of Renaissance artists and in the empirical methods pioneered by sixteenth-century artists and humanists. During the Scientific Revolution, the collaboration and experimentation of craft workshops became integrated into the natural sciences. In the eighteenth century, as the new sciences became academic disciplines, these shared origins were obscured, and the divisions between science labs, art studios, and humanists’ archives grew ever wider. Studying the pre-modern workshop provides a bridge between these realms.

M&K employs “hands-on history”—reconstructing techniques of the past—to illuminate the continuous and universal human striving to investigate and understand nature. Such reconstructions offer first-hand glimpses into craft workshops to see artisans using constant experimentation to manipulate natural materials that allows us to understand how “making” can be a form of “knowing.” Reconstructions also raise historical questions that would otherwise remain inaccessible and inconceivable outside of hands-on engagement with materials.

The potential of hands-on research methodologies to advance historical knowledge is modeled in M&K’s [Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org), a digital critical edition and translation of Ms. Fr. 640 that is thoroughly informed by historical reconstruction and pedagogy-driven research. Publishing M&K’s research in this open-access format allows diverse audiences to experience the hands-on processual knowledge of historical techniques, and encourages them to apply and modify M&K’s methods to their own contexts and needs. M&K’s cross-disciplinary collaboration and pedagogy-driven research are incorporated into this Companion for all seeking to implement its methods into their own research and teaching. 

Hands-on experimental history does not need to be expensive or exclusive. It can be scaled for various levels of learners, and it can be accommodated in a range of research spaces: labs, studios, classrooms, libraries, museums. Some of the outcomes we have witnessed in our own classrooms: students who believe they are “no good at science” can experience laboratory experimentation and dissolve preconceptions about science, and science students can gain a more robust and expansive understanding of the history of their disciplines.

By proposing a shift from textbooks and tests to hands-on work and process, we aim to stress the importance of other ways of knowing—making, experimentation, hand-skills, collaboration, and failure—to foster cross-fertilization between the humanities and sciences, and engage all levels of learners with first-hand experience of how human beings transform natural materials. This aim can be carried out in kitchens, studios, and laboratories, from elementary school through higher education, and we believe it can promote a new kind of material and scientific literacy, not of the content of science, but of its essence as exploration and experimentation with nature.
