#  Guide to historical recipes and collections

There are far more sources available in online library collections that
you may wish to use instead, below is a sample of sources we found
useful in Making and Knowing classes.

We also recommend scouring your institutional library’s holdings for
historical items related to food and recipes.

## Sources in English

**Wellcome Ms. 213:** [<u>"A Booke of diuers
Medecines</u>](https://wellcomecollection.org/works/u3w8qbrt/items?canvas=30),
Broothes, Salues, Waters, Syroppes and Oyntementes of which many or the
most part haue been experienced and tryed by the speciall practize of
Mrs Corlyon. Anno Domini 1606."

**Harleian Ms. 279 (c. 1430).** [<u>Austin,</u> *<u>Two
Fifteenth-Century Cook
Books</u>*](https://archive.org/stream/twofifteenthcent00austuoft#page/n7/mode/2up)

**Théodore Turquet de Mayerne (1573-1655, attr.),** [*<u>Archimagirus
anglo-gallicus: or, Excellent & approved receipts and experiments in
cookery</u>*](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Archimagirus_Anglo_Gallicus_or_excellent/EI9mAAAAcAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=mayerne%20archimagirus&pg=PP7&printsec=frontcover)
\[London\]: Printed for G. Bedell, and T. Collins, and are to be sold at
their shop at the Middle-Temple-Gate, in Fleet-street, 1658.

**[<u>A Book of Cookrye</u>](http://digital.library.leeds.ac.uk/6320/)
(England, 1591) \[See**
**[<u>here</u>](http://jducoeur.org/Cookbook/Cookrye.html) for a
transcription\]**

-   To make a dish of Snow.

-   How to make a Pudding in a Turnep root.
    > [<u>http://jducoeur.org/Cookbook/Cookrye.html</u>](http://jducoeur.org/Cookbook/Cookrye.html)

[<u>Hugh Plat,</u> *<u>Delightes for Ladies</u>* <u>(England,
1609)</u>](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Delightes_for_Ladies_to_adorne_their_Per/wFNpAAAAcAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=hugh%20plat%20delightes%20for%20ladies&pg=PA1&printsec=frontcover)

[<u>Robert May, The Accomplisht Cook
(1656)</u>](https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Accomplisht_Cook_Or_The_Art_and_Myst/7dhopy-AJ98C?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=may%20the%20accomplisht%20cook&pg=PP7&printsec=frontcover)

## Sources in French

**Le Menagier de Paris (1393):** See [<u>the original
French</u>](https://archive.org/details/lemnagierdepari03renagoog) and
the [<u>online
translation</u>](http://www.daviddfriedman.com/Medieval/Cookbooks/Menagier/Menagier.html#BEVERAGES%20FOR%20INVALIDS)
by Janet Hinson (make sure to check the original French).

[**<u>Le Thresor de santé, ou mesnage de la vie humaine divisé en dix
livres…</u>**](http://www.biusante.parisdescartes.fr/histoire/medica/resultats/index.php?cote=39201&do=chapitre)

A. Lyon, chez Jean Anth. Huguetan, 1607.

## Online collections of recipes and culinary texts

-   [<u>Monumenta Culinaria et Diaetetica
    > Historica</u>](https://www.uni-giessen.de/de/fbz/fb05/germanistik/absprache/sprachverwendung/gloning/kobu.htm)

[<u>Corpus of culinary & dietetic texts of Europe from the Middle Ages
to
1800</u>](https://www.uni-giessen.de/de/fbz/fb05/germanistik/absprache/sprachverwendung/gloning/kobu.htm)

(Focus on German texts, but also some other European texts including in
English)

-   Dutch Cooking History (with some English content):

[<u>http://www.kookhistorie.nl/index.htm</u>](http://www.kookhistorie.nl/index.htm)

-   See also the **Rijksmuseum** recipe book collection (a work in
    > progress that already includes 583 titles), you can find the list
    > here:  
    > [<u>http://library.rijksmuseum.nl/cgi-bin/koha/opac-shelves.pl?viewshelf=135&sortfield=</u>](http://library.rijksmuseum.nl/cgi-bin/koha/opac-shelves.pl?viewshelf=135&sortfield=)   
    > \* click "lists" in the top right and then "receptuurboeken"

-   [<u>http://www.kookhistorie.nl/index.htm</u>](http://www.kookhistorie.nl/index.htm)

-   **For images of kitchen set up and implements**  
    > See Scappi's culinary treatise *Opera* (1570), which concludes
    > with several illustrated pages detailing kitchen set up,
    > equipment, and technologies (check it out here, scroll to the end
    > of the book):
    > [<u>https://archive.org/stream/operavenetiascap00scap#page/n935/mode/thumb</u>](https://archive.org/stream/operavenetiascap00scap#page/n935/mode/thumb)

## Other Databases

-   You may also wish to search for period recipes on **EEBO,**
    > **Gallica, VD17, Europeana, Wellcome**; also of possible interest
    > are **ECCO** (18th c), **Google
    > Books,** [**<u>Archive.org</u>**](http://archive.org), and
    > **Worldcat.**

-   The digital database of the US National Library of Medicine (NLM)

    -   To find recipes in their online catalogue, see the interview
        > with NLM staff:
        > [<u>http://recipes.hypotheses.org/category/food-and-drink</u>](http://recipes.hypotheses.org/category/food-and-drink)

-   Universal Short Title List and digitized editions:
    > [<u>http://www.ustc.ac.uk/</u>](http://www.ustc.ac.uk/)

-   EMMO: Early Modern (English) Manuscripts Online, an online
    > searchable database of encoded semi-diplomatic transcriptions of
    > all Folger manuscripts from the period 1500-1700:
    > [<u>http://collation.folger.edu/2013/11/emmo-early-modern-manuscripts-online/</u>](http://collation.folger.edu/2013/11/emmo-early-modern-manuscripts-online/)

## Other relevant websites

-   [<u>http://www.historicalcookingproject.com/</u>](http://www.historicalcookingproject.com/)

-   Ken Albala’s blog
    > [<u>http://kenalbala.blogspot.nl/</u>](http://kenalbala.blogspot.nl/)

    -   Ken Albala’s 16<sup>th</sup> c funnel cake, *The Most Excellent
        > Book of Cookery: An edition and translation of the
        > 16th-century Livre fort excellent de cuisine*,
        > [<u>http://kenalbala.blogspot.nl/2014/04/sixteenth-century-crespe.html</u>](http://kenalbala.blogspot.nl/2014/04/sixteenth-century-crespe.html)

-   The Recipes Project:
    > [<u>http://recipes.hypotheses.org/</u>](http://recipes.hypotheses.org/category/teaching)

    -   Interview with the key organizer:
        > [<u>http://recipes.hypotheses.org/3216</u>](http://recipes.hypotheses.org/3216)

-   See also culinary historian Ivan Day, historic food recreations:
    > [<u>http://foodhistorjottings.blogspot.com/</u>](http://www.historicfood.com/portal.htm)
