# Class Activity: Breadmolding

## Objectives

-   explore historical breadmaking recipes and techniques

-   learn to bake bread

-   produce loaves of bread to use as molds

This activity has two parts

-   Part 1 (at home before class): learn about baking bread and produce loaves to use as molds for a small object

-   Part 2 (in class): pour wax (and/or sulfur) into your molds, unmold

## Part 1 – making bread and molding (at home, in advance)

### Materials

- flour

- water

- salt

- yeast (optional)

- any other ingredients called for in your recipe of choice (see below)

### Tools 

- mixing bowl

- surface for kneading

- baking sheet

- oven

### Objective

Essentially you need to bake bread according to a recipe of your
choosing (early modern or contemporary), cut it open, and impress an
object into it while it is still warm and moist, let it cool and dry so
that there is a hollow into which we can cast. You then bring this mold
to class, so that we can pour wax (and/or sulfur) into it. Take notes of
your choices and experiences.

### Note on baking bread, then and now:

While modern bread is typically made with dry yeast, a common historical
rising agent was a sourdough starter. You may wish to explore creating
your own sourdough starter at home (there are many online resources
about how to do this safely). You can also follow one of the early
modern recipes for bread that we are asking you to find (see below).
After looking into these options, you may logistically only be able to
bake bread with yeast (and that is ok). Start experimenting!

### Sources on making sixteenth-century bread

-  [<u>John Evelyn’s bread
recipes</u>](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1DEwyDoUtKeA0MgbW_Fk6mS5WzcJbZDor/view?usp=sharing),
including varieties of French bread

-  ([<u>working
transcription</u>](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1GNklzsgidrIGdf2Twf78eJy0fgy-S6Tuh3VKGdKNTJU)
of Evelyn’s recipes by Reut Ullman, Columbia University)

-  The Food Timeline- Bread History (good bibliography):
[<u>http://www.foodtimeline.org/foodbreads.html#breadhistory</u>](http://www.foodtimeline.org/foodbreads.html#breadhistory)

-  Early English Bread Project:
 [<u>https://earlybread.wordpress.com/</u>](https://earlybread.wordpress.com/)

-  The Recipes Project:
[<u>http://recipes.hypotheses.org/</u>](http://recipes.hypotheses.org/)

-  The Wellcome Library has digitized nearly all its recipe
manuscripts. You can search the library here:
[<u>http://wellcomelibrary.org/</u>](http://wellcomelibrary.org/)

-  Monumenta Culinaria et Diaetetica Historica

-  Corpus of culinary & dietetic texts of Europe from the Middle Ages
to 1800:
[<u>https://www.staff.uni-giessen.de/gloning/kobu.htm</u>](https://www.staff.uni-giessen.de/gloning/kobu.htm)

-  Dutch Cooking History (with some English content):
[<u>http://www.kookhistorie.nl/index.htm</u>](http://www.kookhistorie.nl/index.htm)

### A few tips 

-  You are welcome to work alone or in groups of two.

-  Sourdough starter: Best to keep the portion you are saving in the
refrigerator between bread baking sessions. Do not use the entire
starter for a single loaf of bread, but instead feed and divide it,
always saving a cup or so for your next loaf.

-   Start early with the experiment as it will take you some time to
become adept at making bread, and you may need more than one try at
the mold making. (You may also eat up some of your baking
experiments!)

-   For the molding pattern for your one-sided or two-piece mold, you
will need to choose a relatively uncomplicated object, such as a key,
flat shell, a large medallion or necklace pendant, as a pattern.

-   To prepare your molds, you will need to choose an object (also known as the "model" or the "pattern") to press into your bread. The manuscript's entries on fol. 140v can be interpreted in many ways, so how you choose to do this is up to you.

-   We recommend that you make more than one mold and it is always interesting to try different models.

-   You can make one-piece, two-piece, or multi-piece molds, depending on the size and shape of your pattern/model (i.e., the object you are pressing into your bread) and the size of your loaf (or your ball of pith, depending on how you interpret the author-practitioner’s instructions). Have a look at how previous cohorts of Making and Knowing students interpreted them by consulting the fieldnotes site. Or, just experiment on your own.

-   If you make your molds some days before the casting process, you should probably keep them wrapped in plastic in the fridge, if possible, so they do not get moldy.

-   Breadmolds can be fragile, so you might want to transport them in a rigid container to class.

-   Min Lim’s article about bread (see below) will really help you with practical questions.

### Instructions

1.  Look for early modern bread recipes - can you find many? Why do you
    think this might be? (You should do this whether or not you are
    planning to use a historical recipe for making your bread.)

2.  Bake bread according to an early modern recipe, or according to
   another recipe (you can choose how you bake the bread, just record
   your justifications).

3.  Find the bread molding instructions in [<u>BnF Ms. Fr.
     640</u>](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/folios) (read
     folios 140v and 156r - English translations are provided on this
    website, click here for shortcuts to
     [<u>140v</u>](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/folios/140v/f/140v/tl)
    ‘For casting in sulfur’ and ‘Molding and shrinking a large figure’
    and
   [<u>156r</u>](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/folios/156r/f/156r/tl)
    ‘Molding promptly and reducing a hollow form to a relief’). Read
    both pages in full, including the marginalia. If you have time,
    explore the edition more - try searching for a word (like bread or
    sulfur in the search box, or scroll forward and back).

4.  Write an experiment protocol that lays out how you interpreted the
    Fr. 640 recipes and the step-by-step process which you will follow
    in reconstructing them. When you have finished the experiment,
    note down what you had to change in your protocol and why.  
      
    Keep detailed notes on the experience. What is hard? What is
    unexpected? What happens?

5.  When you have finished baking your loaf, let it cool a little (or a
    lot – does this make a difference to the outcome?). Cut it in half
    and impress a small object of your choice into the bread pith.

6.  Bring your mold and molded object to class.

### Read in preparation for class

-   Le Pouésard, Emma. "Pain, Ostie, Rostie: Bread in Early Modern
 Europe."
    [<u>http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_046_fa_16</u>](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_046_fa_16).

### Other helpful resources in *Secrets of Craft and Nature*

-   Le Pouésard, Emma. “Bread as Mediating Material: Tactile Memory and
    Touch in Ms. Fr. 640,”
  [<u>http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_050_fa_16</u>](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_050_fa_16).

-   Landsman, Rozemarijn and Jonah Rowen. "Uses of Sulfur in Casting."
    [<u>http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_007_fa_14</u>](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_007_fa_14).

-   Lim, Min. "To Shrink an Object: Bread Molding in Ms. Fr. 640."
    [<u>http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_076_fa_18</u>](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_076_fa_18).


### Additional sources to explore on the uses of bread in the early modern workshop

If you have time, search in other sources for other uses are made of
bread in the workshop:

-   Alessio Piemontese, *Book of Secrets* (1555); various English
versions on EEBO; French versions on Gallica; Italian versions...

-   (For English: Search for Ruscelli, Girolamo, *The secretes of the
reuerende Maister Alexis of Piemount Containyng excellent remedies
against diuers diseases, woundes, and other accidents, with the manner
to make distillations, parfumes, confitures, diynges, colours, fusions
and meltynges. ... Translated out of Frenche into Englishe, by Wyllyam
Warde* (1558).

-   Hugh Platt, *The Jewell House of Art and Nature: Containing divers
rare and profitable Inventions, together with sundry new experimentes
in the Art of Husbandry, Distillation, and Molding* (London, 1594).
EEBO

-   Cennino Cennini, *Il libro dell’Arte (The Craftsman’s Handbook)*,
trans. Daniel V. Thompson, Jr. (New York: Dover, 1960).

-   Vannoccio Biringuccio, *Pirotechnia* (1540), trans. Cyril Stanley
Smith and Martha Teach Gnudi (repr., Cambridge, MA, 1966).

-   Theophilus, *The Various Arts: De Diversis Artibus*, ed. and trans.
C. R. Dodwell (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986).

-   Benvenuto Cellini, *Two Treatises*, trans. C. R. Ashbee (repr.
2006).

##  Part 2 – Wax casting (in class)

Review your experimental protocol with your instructor. What steps are
described in Fr. 640? What other steps might be needed? (For example,
how might you make it easier to release the cast object from the mold?)

### Safety notes for melting wax

-   heat the wax slowly

-   make sure no wax gets on the hotplate – this would produce smoke

-   if your melting receptacle does not have an insulated handle, make
    sure to wear heat protection glove to handle it

-   do not put down the hot receptacle on a non-fire-resistant surface

### Questions to keep in mind during the activity and discuss in class

-   What does the impression in the bread look like? Is this different
    from what you expected?

-   What does the cast object look like compared to the original? What
    does this tell you about the original object, the breadmold, the
    process?

-   What might an early modern artist or craftsman do with the wax
    object? What might it tell them?

-   What properties of the bread make it a good material for this
    purpose? What else could it be used for in a workshop?
