# Breadmolding
{{< figure src="/images/media/breadmolding-kneading.jpg" alt="Kneading Bread">}}
## Introduction

The 16th-century artisanal/technical manual, BnF Ms. Fr. 640, contains
hundreds of entries that describe making processes and techniques from
the Renaissance. These include instructions for and observations about
painting, gilding, arms and armor production, plant cultivation, and
making molds and metal casts.

Ms. Fr. 640 contains three mentions of bread as a material that can be
used to take an impression of another object quickly and neatly. This impression
can be used as a mold into which sulfur or wax is cast. It is an example
of the kinds of intermediate processes that artists must have relied on
in the sixteenth century, akin to making a 3D printed prototype in resin
before casting in gold for a modern jeweler, but for which very little
evidence survives.

Two entries are found on [<u>folio
140v</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/folios/140v/f/140v/tl)
and another on [<u>fol.
156r.</u>](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/folios/156r/f/156r/tl)
mentions breadmolding as an alternative process for “Molding promptly.”

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 11%" />
<col style="width: 88%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>Folio</strong></th>
<th><strong>Translation</strong></th>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<th>140v</th>
<th><p><strong>For casting in sulfur</strong></p>
<p>To cast neatly in sulfur, arrange the bread pith under thebrazier, as
you know. Mold in it what you want &amp; let dry, &amp; you will have
very neat work.</p>
<p><strong>Molding and shrinking a large figure</strong></p>
<p>Mold it with bread pith coming from the oven, or as the aforesaid,
&amp; in drying out, it will shrink &amp; consequently the medal that
you will cast in it. You <del>it</del> can, by this means, by elongating
and widening the imprinted bread pith, vary the figure &amp; with one
image make many various ones. Breadcoming from the oven is better. And
the one that is reheated twice retracts more. You can cast sulfur
without leaving the imprint of the bread to dry, if you want to mold as
big as it is. But if you want to let it shrink, make it dry, either more
or less.</p></th>
</tr>
<tr class="header">
<th>156r</th>
<th><p><strong>Molding promptly and reducing a hollow form to a
relief</strong></p>
<p>You can imprint the relief of a medal in colored wax, &amp; you will
have a hollow form, in which you can cast <em>en noyau</em> a relief
<sup>of your sand</sup>, on which you will make a hollow form of lead or
tin, in which you will cast a wax relief. And then on that wax you will
make your mold <em>en noyau</em> hollow, to cast there the relief of
gold &amp; silver or any other metal you like. But to hasten your work
if you are in a hurry, make the first imprint &amp; hollow form in bread
pith, prepared as you know, which will mold very neatly. And into that,
cast in melted wax, which will give you a beautiful relief on which you
will make your <em>noyau</em>.</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
</tbody>
</table>

This activity takes up relatively little class time and uses familiar
materials such as bread and wax (the sulfur is optional and requires
access to a fume hood or well-ventilated space). The results are quick
to achieve and are striking; this can be a very easy and successful
hands-on activity to encourage confidence and shows how hands-on making
raises new questions. It can be done as a one-off activity in person or
remotely, or works well as a skillbuilding exercise early in a longer
course.

The activity introduces students to hands-on historical reconstruction
and performative interpretation of texts. It is a good exercise to
jump-start discussions of tacit/embodied knowledge in arts and sciences. It is also an instructive introduction to the principles of molding. More generally, it encourages students to think differently about historical
materials and processes, by de-familiarising something we take for
granted as food, and exploring its varied uses in everyday life,
medicine, artistic practice, and the workshop.

This activity is split into 2 parts, the first part can be done
asynchronously in advance of the group/in class activity:

1\) The students are asked to explore historical recipes for bread, bake their own bread, and impress a small object into the pith. They are also asked to develop a protocol for step 2 - the pour. See the [student activity sheet]({{<ref "breadmolding-student-activity-sheet" >}})

2\) Part 2 takes place together in class (or can be done online). There
is no worksheet, because part of the assignment is for the students to
closely read the manuscript and develop their own experimental protocol. See the sample class plan below.

**Themes:**

Embodied knowledge, everyday life, food, material culture, ephemeral
art, art, sculpture, decorative arts, craft

**Safety notice: uses hotplates**

If working with younger participants, the step of pouring melted wax can be performed by the instructor.

**Remote or in Class**

**Duration:**

Approx 1.5hrs in class

Plus one week advance preparation in order for participants to learn to
bake bread (in own time)

**Facilities:**

Can be done almost anywhere (if only using wax for pour)

If in ventilated space (lab/studio/outdoors) can use sulfur

**Materials and Tools:**

linseed (or vegetable) oil

wax

paintbrushes

hotplates

heatproof gloves

heat resistant container for melting (eg. tin can / milk frothing
pitcher/ saucepan / beakers

stirring stick (e.g. chopstick, glass rod, spoon)

plate / newspaper (something to contain mess)

trivet or other heatproof surface

paper towels

Optional: a way to repair flaws or leaks in your molds, such as masking
tape or modeling clay like plasticine

Standard fire safety equipment (e.g. fire extinguisher and/or blanker)

**If using sulfur:**

yellow sulfur powder

nitrile gloves

thermometer

## Resources

Student activity sheet breadmolding

Powerpoint presentation showing the process

Videos showing the process and result

-   [<u>https://vimeo.com/419940044/da3f9a4451?share=copy</u>](https://vimeo.com/419940044/da3f9a4451?share=copy)

-   [<u>https://vimeo.com/419949231?share=copy</u>](https://vimeo.com/419949231?share=copy)

### Suggested reading (to assign for class and/or further information)

If you only assign one piece of reading, we suggest Le Pouésard, “Pain,
Ostie, Rostie” (see below).

#### Helpful resources in *Secrets of Craft and Nature*

*Secrets of Craft and Nature in Renaissance France. A Digital Critical
Edition and English Translation of BnF Ms. Fr. 640*, edited by Making
and Knowing Project, Pamela H. Smith, Naomi Rosenkranz, Tianna Helena
Uchacz, Tillmann Taape, Clément Godbarge, Sophie Pitman, Jenny
Boulboullé, Joel Klein, Donna Bilak, Marc Smith, and Terry Catapano. New
York: Making and Knowing Project, 2020.

-   [Le Pouésard, Emma. "Pain, Ostie, Rostie: Bread in Early Modern Europe."](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_046_fa_16).

-   [Le Pouésard, Emma. “Bread as Mediating Material: Tactile Memory and
  Touch in Ms. Fr. 640.”](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_050_fa_16)

-   [Landsman, Rozemarjin and Jonah Rowen. "Uses of Sulfur in Casting."](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_007_fa_14).

-   [Lim, Min. "To Shrink an Object: Bread Molding in Ms. Fr. 640."](https://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_076_fa_18).

-   Sulfur-Passed Wax

    -   [Landsman/Rowen, “Uses of Sulfur for Casting.”](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_007_fa_14)

    -   [Kang, “Black Sulfured Wax.”](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/essays/ann_051_fa_16)

Note: for additional help and resources, try following the field notes
links in the essays above.

##### Sources on making sixteenth-century bread:

-  [<u>John Evelyn’s bread
recipes</u>](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1DEwyDoUtKeA0MgbW_Fk6mS5WzcJbZDor/view?usp=sharing),
including varieties of French bread

-  ([<u>working
transcription</u>](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1GNklzsgidrIGdf2Twf78eJy0fgy-S6Tuh3VKGdKNTJU)
of Evelyn’s recipes by Reut Ullman, Columbia University)

-  The Food Timeline- Bread History (good bibliography):
[<u>http://www.foodtimeline.org/foodbreads.html#breadhistory</u>](http://www.foodtimeline.org/foodbreads.html#breadhistory)

-  Early English Bread Project:
 [<u>https://earlybread.wordpress.com/</u>](https://earlybread.wordpress.com/)

-  The Recipes Project:
[<u>http://recipes.hypotheses.org/</u>](http://recipes.hypotheses.org/)

-  The Wellcome Library has digitized nearly all its recipe
manuscripts. You can search the library here:
[<u>http://wellcomelibrary.org/</u>](http://wellcomelibrary.org/)

-  Monumenta Culinaria et Diaetetica Historica

-  Corpus of culinary & dietetic texts of Europe from the Middle Ages
to 1800:
[<u>https://www.staff.uni-giessen.de/gloning/kobu.htm</u>](https://www.staff.uni-giessen.de/gloning/kobu.htm)

-  Dutch Cooking History (with some English content):
[<u>http://www.kookhistorie.nl/index.htm</u>](http://www.kookhistorie.nl/index.htm)


#### Primary sources on the uses of bread in the early modern workshop

If you have time, search in other sources for other uses are made of
bread in the workshop:

-   Alessio Piemontese, *Book of Secrets* (1555); various English
versions on EEBO; French versions on Gallica; Italian versions...

-   (For English: Search for Ruscelli, Girolamo, *The secretes of the
reuerende Maister Alexis of Piemount Containyng excellent remedies
against diuers diseases, woundes, and other accidents, with the manner
to make distillations, parfumes, confitures, diynges, colours, fusions
and meltynges. ... Translated out of Frenche into Englishe, by Wyllyam
Warde* (1558).

-   Hugh Platt, *The Jewell House of Art and Nature: Containing divers
rare and profitable Inventions, together with sundry new experimentes
in the Art of Husbandry, Distillation, and Molding* (London, 1594).
EEBO

-   Cennino Cennini, *Il libro dell’Arte (The Craftsman’s Handbook)*,
trans. Daniel V. Thompson, Jr. (New York: Dover, 1960).

-   Vannoccio Biringuccio, *Pirotechnia* (1540), trans. Cyril Stanley
Smith and Martha Teach Gnudi (repr., Cambridge, MA, 1966).

-   Theophilus, *The Various Arts: De Diversis Artibus*, ed. and trans.
C. R. Dodwell (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986).

-   Benvenuto Cellini, *Two Treatises*, trans. C. R. Ashbee (repr.
2006).

#### Molding & Casting
- Difference between molding and casting from the Getty Art and Architecture Thesaurus:
Giving form to something by use of a mold; usually refers to pressing a material into the mold, as distinct from pouring liquid material into the mold, for which prefer "casting."

- WATCH: For an illustration of molding and casting, watch [VIDEO: Making a Medal Using the Sand Casting Process from the Frick Collection in collaboration with M&K.](https://www.youtube.com/embed/TL919mY28fk)

#### On historical reconstruction as historical method

-   Ken Albala, “Cooking as Research Methodology: Experiments in
    Renaissance Cuisine,” *Renaissance Food from Rabelais to
    Shakespeare: Culinary Readings and Culinary Histories*, ed. Joan
    Fitzpatrick (Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2010), pp. 73–88.

-   Fors, Hjalmar, Lawrence M. Principe, and H. Otto Sibum. ‘From the
  Library to the Laboratory and Back Again: Experiment as a Tool for
  Historians of Science.’ *Ambix* 63, no. 2 (2016): 85–97.

-   Lawrence Principe, “Chymical Exotica in the Seventeenth Century, or,
  How to Make the Bologna Stone” *Ambix* 63 (2016): 118-44.

-   Ad Stijnman, “Style and technique are inseparable: art technological
    sources and reconstructions,” *Art of the Past. Sources and
    Reconstructions. The proceedings of the First Symposium of the Art
    Technological Source Research Study Group*, ed. by Mark Clarke,
    Joyce H. Townsend, and Ad Stijnman (Amsterdam: Archetype, 2005):
    1-8.

-   For an example of an exemplary reconstruction experiment by a
    conservator, see Maartje Stols-Witlox, “Sizing layers for oil
    painting in western European sources (1500-1900): historical
    recipes and reconstructions,” *Proceedings of the Second ATSR
    Symposium* (2008), pp. 148-163.

-   Pamela H. Smith “Historians in the Laboratory: Reconstruction of
    Renaissance Art and Technology in the Making and Knowing Project.”
    Art History 39, no. 2 (2016): 210–33.

-   Tillmann Taape, Pamela H. Smith, and Tianna Helena Uchacz.
    “Schooling the Eye and Hand: Performative Methods of Research and
    Pedagogy in the Making and Knowing Project.” *Berichte Zur
    Wissenschaftsgeschichte* 43, no. 3 (2020): 323–40.

#### 

#### About Teaching Breadmolding:

Sophie Pitman, “Baking and Knowing: Iterative Processes and Iterative
Teaching in a Historical Laboratory”. *Detours: Social Science Education
Research Journal* 2 (1), 2021, 33-41.
https://detoursjournal.org/index.php/detours/article/view/61.

### Sample class plan

#### Discussion: recipe research and making bread

We recommend you start class with a group discussion about each
student’s experience baking bread and exploring recipes for bread.

Suggested questions:

- Why do you think there are so few recipes for bread in early modern
sources?

- What is bread as a material in the workshop?

- What was it used for in the sixteenth century?

- What properties does it have that make it useful?

- Does it fit into some sort of informal taxonomy of materials and
properties?

- Today we take bread for granted as a food, but how might its uses in
the workshop re-orient that understanding?

#### Activity: wax casting

The activity sheet asks students to put together an experimental
protocol for the wax casting from the entries in Ms. Fr. 640. We
recommend you discuss these with the group, and invite experimentation.
However, for a successful and safe activity, we recommend that any
protocol should include these essential steps:

-   melt wax on low heat on a hotplate

-   (optional) brush the hollow of the breadmold with vegetable oil to
    make the unmolding easier. If students omit this step, they may
    have to soak the breadmold in order to remove all the pith from
    the cast object.

-   place the mold on a surface covered with newsprint, paper plates, or
  similar to catch any spillages

-   the molds can be fixed in place with masking tape

-   carefully pour melted wax into the mold

-   let the wax cool completely before attempting to remove the object

#### Discussion: breadmolding, bread as a material in the workshop

Suggested questions:

- Who might benefit from this process? i.e. Why would you need to make a
temporary mold of a small object?

- What do you learn by doing it yourself that you would not consider
when just reading through the instructions?

- Does this raise further research questions you might like to pursue?

- Based on your experience of breadmolding, what can we (as historians
of art/science/material culture / etc.) learn from historical
reconstruction?
